ISBN	978-93-81576-03-8
©	Anand	Neelakantan,	2013
Cover									Urvi	Dutt	Vashistha,	Leadstart	Design
Layouts					Ajay	Shah
Printing					Manipal	International	Printing	Press	Ltd
First	published	in	India,	December	2013	by
PLATINUM	PRESS
An	imprint	of
LEADSTART	PUBLISHING	PVT	LTD
Trade	Centre,	Level	1,	Bandra	Kurla	Complex
Bandra	(E),	Mumbai	400	051,	INDIA
T	+	91	22	40700804	F	+91	22	40700800
E	info@leadstartcorp.com	W	www.leadstartcorp.com
US	Office	Axis	Corp,	7845	E	Oakbrook	Circle,	Madison,	WI	53717,	USA
All	rights	reserved	worldwide
No	 part	 of	 this	 publication	 may	 be	 reproduced,	 stored	 in	 or	 introduced	 into	 a	 retrieval	 system,	 or
transmitted,	 in	 any	 form,	 or	 by	 any	 means	 (electronic,	 mechanical,	 photocopying,	 recording	 or
otherwise),	without	the	prior	permission	of	the	Publisher.	Any	person	who	commits	an	unauthorised	act
in	relation	to	this	publication	can	be	liable	to	criminal	prosecution	and	civil	claims	for	damages.
Disclaimer	This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	The	contents	of	this	book	are	the	expressions	and	opinions	of	its
author	and	a	work	of	imagination.	It	does	not	claim	scriptural	or	historical	authenticity.	This	work	does
not	 represent	 the	 views	 of	 the	 Publisher	 nor	 endorses	 them	 in	 any	 way.	 The	 Publisher	 makes	 no
representations	or	warranties	as	to	the	completeness	or	accuracy	of	the	information	used.

To	my	Aparna,
and	our	Ananya	&	Abhinav

ABOUT	THE	AUTHOR
I	 WAS	 BORN	 IN	 A	 QUAINT	 little	 village	 called
Thripoonithura,	 on	 the	 outskirts	 of	 Cochin,
Kerala.	 Located	 east	 of	 mainland	 Ernakulam,
across	 Vembanad	 Lake,	 this	 village	 had	 the
distinction	 of	 being	 the	 seat	 of	 the	 Cochin	 royal
family.	However,	it	was	more	famous	for	its	100odd	 temples,	 the	 various	 classical	 artists	 it
produced,	 and	 its	 school	 of	 music.	 I	 remember
many	an	evening	listening	to	the	faint	rhythm	of	the	chendas	coming
from	the	temples,	and	the	notes	of	the	flute	escaping	over	the	rugged
walls	 of	 the	 music	 school.	 However,	 Gulf	 money	 and	 the	 rapidly
expanding	city	of	Cochin,	have	wiped	away	all	remaining	vestiges	of
that	 old-world	 charm.	 The	 village	 has	 evolved	 into	 the	 usual,
unremarkable,	suburban	hellhole	–	clones	of	which	dot	India.
Growing	up	in	a	village	with	more	temples	than	was	necessary,	it	was
little	wonder	that	mythology	fascinated	me.	Ironically,	I	was	drawn	to
the	anti-heroes.	My	own	life	went	on…	I	became	an	engineer,	joined
the	 Indian	 Oil	 Corporation,	 moved	 to	 Bangalore,	 married	 Aparna,
and	welcomed	my	daughter	Ananya,	and	son,	Abhinav.	However,	the
voices	 of	 yore	 refused	 to	 be	 silenced	 in	 my	 mind.	 I	 felt	 impelled	 to
narrate	the	stories	of	the	vanquished	and	the	damned;	and	give	life	to
those	 silent	 heroes	 who	 have	 been	 overlooked	 in	 our	 uncritical
acceptance	of	conventional	renderings	of	our	epics.
This	is	Anand’s	second	book	and	follows	the	outstanding	success	of
his	 national	 #1	 bestseller,	 ASURA	 Tale	 Of	 The	 Vanquished
(Platinum	 Press	 2012).	 AJAYA	 Book	 II,	 Rise	 Of	 Kali,	 is	 due	 for
release	later	in	2014.
Anand	can	be	reached	at:	mail@asura.co.in

CONTENTS
Author’s	Note
Select	Cast	of	Characters
Genealogy
Prelude	~	GANDHARA
1			PRINCE	OF	THE	BLOOD
2			THE	TEACHER	COMES
3			CHILD	OF	THE	FOREST
4			THE	CHARIOTEER’S	SON
5			MAVERICK	BRAHMIN
6			CHALLENGE	OF	THE	EUNUCH
7			THE	LESSON
8			RAMA	WITH	THE	PLOUGH
9			THE	BEAST
10	NAGAS
11	IN	THE	SHADOWS
12	THE	TRIAL
13	DHARMAVEERA
14	GURUDAKSHINA
15	DHARMA
16	RETURN	OF	THE	SUTA
17	WANTED
18	GRADUATION
19	REVENGE	OF	A	BRAHMIN
20	HOUSE	OF	LAC

21	SWAYAMVARA
22	MARRIAGE
23	MARCH	OF	CIVILIZATION
24	A	CITY	CURSED
25	RAJASUYA
26	THE	FALL
27	ROLL	OF	THE	DICE
Short	Notes
Glossary
Acknowledgements

AUTHOR’S	NOTE
WHY	WRITE	ABOUT	DURYODHANA?

Many	years	ago,	I	witnessed	a	spectacle	many	of	my	readers	would	not	even	have
heard	 about,	 let	 alone	 seen.	 It	 was	 a	 day	 of	 grand	 celebration.	 Even	 the	 hot
tropical	sun	shining	above	could	not	diminish	the	pervading	festive	spirit.	There
were	 more	 than	 100,000	 people	 assembled	 to	 watch	 the	 procession	 and	 pay
homage	to	the	presiding	deity	of	the	temple.	The	devotees	belonged	to	all	castes
and	 creeds	 and	 the	 fervour	 they	 displayed	 was	 bewitching	 to	 watch.	 Strangely
enough,	 the	 majestic	 festival	 was	 in	 honour	 of	 a	 man	 I	 had	 always	 believed	 to
have	few	admirers,	if	any.	The	deity	at	the	Malanada	Temple	in	Poruvazhy	village,
Kerala,	 is	 none	 other	 than	 the	 most	 reviled	 villain	 of	 Indian	 mythology	 –
Duryodhana.	 If	 the	 devotees	 are	 to	 be	 believed,	 the	 tradition	 of	 this	 procession
goes	back	centuries	to	the	time	of	the	Mahabharata	itself.
There	is	a	fascinating	story	attached	to	the	temple:	Duryodhana	came	to	the	village
in	 search	 of	 the	 Pandavas	 in	 exile.	 Thirsty,	 he	 asked	 an	 old	 woman	 for	 water.
Impulsively,	she	gave	him	the	toddy	she	was	carrying.	The	parched	Prince	drank	it
with	relish.	It	was	only	then	that	the	woman	noticed	he	was	a	Kshatriya	warrior
and	he	could	lose	his	caste	by	drinking	toddy	served	by	an	Untouchable	Kurathi
woman	 like	 herself.	 Horrified	 by	 what	 she	 had	 done,	 she	 was	 certain	 the
Kshatriya	Prince	would	punish	her	with	death	if	she	told	him	the	truth.	However,
not	 wishing	 to	 cheat	 someone	 who	 had	 trusted	 her,	 she	 confessed	 her	 ‘crime’,
risking	 her	 life.	 She	 waited	 for	 certain	 punishment,	 but	 was	 astonished	 by
Duryodhana’s	reaction.	“Mother,”	he	said,	“there	is	no	caste	for	hunger	and	thirst.
Blessed	are	you	for	putting	the	interests	of	a	thirsty	man	before	your	own	safety.”
The	 villagers	 rushed	 to	 see	 this	 high-born	 man	 who	 was	 so	 different	 from	 the
haughty,	upper-caste	men	who	came	only	to	punish	them	or	treat	them	like	worms.
The	 Hastinapura	 Prince	 announced	 he	 was	 gifting	 the	 surrounding	 villages	 to	 a
temple	that	would	be	built	but	have	no	idol.	A	Kurava	Untouchable	would	be	the
Priest.	To	this	day,	family	members	of	that	old	woman’s	family	are	the	hereditary
Priests	 of	 the	 temple,	 which	 has	 no	 idol.	 Instead,	 the	 presiding	 deity	 is
Duryodhana.	The	minor	deities	are	his	wife	Bhanumati,	his	mother	Gandhari,	and
his	friend	Karna.	It	is	generally	believed	that	the	spirit	of	Duryodhana	resides	here
to	 protect	 the	 poor	 and	 weak.	 He	 answers	 the	 prayers	 of	 the	 destitute	 and	 those

suffering	 from	 disease,	 poverty,	 or	 harassment	 from	 those	 stronger	 than
themselves.	This	deity	is	the	protector	of	the	weak	and	downtrodden.
My	 first	 reaction	 to	 the	 story	 was	 one	 of	 incredulity.	 Why	 would	 a	 Prince	 of
Hastinapura,	located	at	the	northern-most	border	of	the	country,	have	come	all	the
way	 to	 a	 village	 at	 the	 southern	 tip	 of	 India	 –	 a	 distance	 of	 more	 than	 3000
kilometres	–	thousands	of	years	ago?	The	answer	to	my	question	was	like	a	slap	in
my	 face.	 The	 villager	 asked	 me	 why	 the	 Adi	 Shankaracharya	 had	 travelled	 so
many	 times	 from	 a	 village	 in	 Kerala	 to	 Kedarnath	 or	 Badrinath,	 in	 his	 short
lifespan	of	32	years?	It	made	me	rush	home	to	revisit	the	Mahabharata,	an	epic
that	has	inspired	countless	writers	over	the	centuries.	Once	I	started	viewing	the
Kaurava	Prince	through	the	eyes	of	the	villagers	of	Poruvazhy,	a	different	picture
of	 Duryodhana	 began	 to	 emerge	 –	 far	 removed	 from	 the	 scheming,	 roaring,
arrogant	 villain	 of	 popular	 television	 serials	 and	 traditional	 retellings.	 Instead,
here	was	a	brutally	honest	Prince,	brave	and	self-willed,	willing	to	fight	for	what
he	 believed	 in.	 Duryodhana	 never	 believed	 his	 Pandava	 cousins	 to	 be	 of	 divine
origin;	and	to	modern	minds,	their	outlandish	claim	now	sounds	chillingly	similar
to	present-day	political	propaganda	used	to	fool	a	gullible	public.
Duryodhana’s	personality	comes	alive	when	he	makes	Karna,	the	King	of	Anga	at
a	crucial	moment	in	his	life,	when	he	is	being	humiliated	because	of	his	caste.	The
Kaurava	 Prince	 challenges	 orthodoxy	 by	 making	 a	 Suta	 a	 King,	 and	 he	 does	 so
without	 selfish	 motives.	 His	 treatment	 of	 Ekalavya;	 his	 refusal	 to	 fight	 for
Subhadra;	his	courage	in	taking	on	the	Pandavas;	and	his	unwavering	faith	in	his
friends;	 all	 make	 him	 hero	 material	 rather	 than	 a	 despicable	 villain.	 He	 never
attempts	 to	 justify	 his	 treatment	 of	 Draupadi.	 His	 flaws	 make	 him	 human	 and
believable,	 unlike	the	protagonists,	who	 wrap	themselves	 in	a	cloak	of	dharma,
miracles,	and	divinity,	to	justify	their	actions.	Tomes	have	been	written	in	praise
of	 the	 actions	 of	 the	 Pandavas	 and	 Krishna.	 Great	 works	 exist	 about	 Karna	 and
Draupadi.	 There	 are	 literary	 masterpieces	 in	 vernacular	 languages	 about	 Bhima,
Arjuna,	and	Kunti.	However,	except	for	Orubhanga,	a	 play	in	 classical	Sanskrit
by	 Bhasa,	 dealing	 with	 Duryodhana’s	 last	 moments,	 and	 Gadayudha,	 by	 the
medieval	 Kannada	 poet	 Ranna,	 no	 authors	 have	 been	 sympathetic	 to	 the	 Crown
Prince	of	Hastinapura.
Ajaya	is	an	attempt	to	view	the	Mahabharata	from	the	side	that	lost	the	war.	One
of	 the	 meanings	 of	 Duryodhana	 is	 ‘one	 who	 is	 difficult	 to	 conquer’,	 in	 other
words,	Ajaya	(Unconquerable).	Though	named	Suyodhana,	the	Pandavas	used	the

derogatory	‘Dur’	to	slander	him	as	‘one	who	does	not	know	how	to	wield	power
or	 arms’.	 Duryodhana’s	 story	 includes	 those	 of	 Karna,	 Aswathama,	 Ekalavya,
Bhishma,	Drona,	Shakuni,	and	many	others.	It	is	the	narrative	of	the	Others	–	the
defeated,	 insulted,	 trampled	 upon	 –	 who	 fought	 without	 expecting	 divine
intervention;	believing	in	the	justice	of	their	cause.	Perhaps	Ajaya	is	my	 belated
answer	 to	 the	 villager,	 who	 stumped	 me	 with	 his	 simple	 question	 on	 the	 humid
afternoon	 when	 the	 procession	 honouring	 Suyodhana	 was	 marching	 through	 the
green	paddy	fields	of	Poruvazhy:	If	our	Lord	Duryodhana	was	an	evil	man,	why
did	great	men	like	Bhishma,	Drona,	Kripa,	and	the	entire	army	of	Krishna,	fight
the	war	on	his	side?

SELECT	CAST	OF	CHARACTERS
Bhishma:	Grand	Regent	of	the	Kuru	clan	and	granduncle	to	both	the	Pandavas	and	Kauravas.	Also	known	as
Gangadatta	Devavrata.	Referred	to	here	as	the	Grand	Regent	or	Bhishma,	a	 name	 acquired	 after	 he	 took	 a
vow	of	celibacy	and	relinquished	his	claim	to	the	throne	as	a	precondition	to	his	father	marrying	Satyavathi,	a
fisherwoman	(who	had	another	son,	Krishna	Dwaipayana	Vedavyasa,	prior	to	this	marriage).
Vidhura:	 Youngest	 of	 Bhishma’s	 three	 nephews,	 he	 was	 born	 of	 a	 lowly	 house	 cleaner	 and	 the	 sage
Vedavyasa.	A	renowned	scholar	and	a	gentleman,	but	of	low	caste,	he	is	the	Prime	Minister	of	Hastinapura,
and	the	conscience-keeper	of	the	Grand	Regent.
Parshavi:	Vidhura’s	wife.
Dhritarashtra:	Son	 of	 Vedavyasa,	 he	 is	 the	 legitimate,	 though	blind,	King	 of	 Hastinapura,	 and	 father	 of	 the
Kauravas.	Denied	the	kingship	because	of	his	blindness,	Pandu	(his	albino	younger	brother),	reigns	instead.	On
Pandu’s	death,	Dhritarashtra	assumes	the	kingship	nominally,	with	Bhishma	as	Grand	Regent.
Pandu:	Dhritarashtra’s	younger	brother	and	briefly	King	of	Hastinapura	until	his	premature	death.	Cursed	with
impotency,	his	two	wives	(Kunti	and	Madri),	are	impregnated	by	sages	and	gods.	There	are,	however,	enough
hints	in	the	Mahabharata	that	their	five	sons	were	not,	in	fact,	of	divine	origin.	Called	the	Pandavas,	they	are
recognized	 as	 Pandu’s	 sons,	 though	 he	 did	 not	 father	 them.	 Pandu	 dies	 attempting	 sexual	 union	 with	 Madri,
who	then	commits	sati,	leaving	Kunti	to	care	for	all	five	boys.
Kunti:	First	wife	of	Pandu	and	collective	mother	to	the	Pandavas,	she	also	has	an	illegitimate	son.	Ambitious,
ruthless,	and	self-righteous,	she	is	determined	to	ensure	Yudhishtra	succeeds	to	the	throne	of	Hastinapura.
The	Pandavas	(five	sons	of	Pandu):
Yudhishtra	(Dharmaputra):	the	eldest,	was	born	to	Kunti	and	fathered	by	Dharma	or	Yama,	the	God
of	Death.	His	claim	to	the	throne	of	Hastinapura	rests	on	the	fact	that	he	is	considered	Pandu’s	son,	has
divine	lineage,	and	is	older	than	Crown	Prince	Suyodhana	by	a	day.	The	whole	Mahabharata	hinges	on
this	accident	of	birth.
Bhima:	Kunti’s	 next	 divine	 progeny	 is	 the	 Crown	 Prince’s	 archenemy	 and	 is	 renowned	 for	 his	 brute
strength	as	well	as	his	willingness	to	use	it	on	his	brothers’	behalf.
Arjuna:	Youngest	of	Kunti’s	three	divine	sons,	he	is	a	great	archer	and	warrior,	and	Yudhishtra’s	only
hope	of	winning	against	the	Kauravas.
Nakula	&	Sahadeva:	Madri’s	twins,	also	of	divine	lineage,	play	minor	roles	in	the	epic	as	sidekicks	to
their	three	older	siblings.
Draupadi:	 The	 wife	 shared	 by	 all	 five	 Pandava	 brothers.	 Dhristadyumna	 is	 her	 brother,	 and	 Shikandi	 (a
eunuch),	an	adopted	sibling.	She	is	spirited	and	does	not	take	insults	quietly.	Fiercely	determined,	she	is	perhaps
the	real	‘man’	in	the	Pandava	camp.
Gandhari:	 Princess	 of	 Gandhara,	 Bhishma	 forcibly	 carries	 her	 off	 to	 marry	 his	 blind	 nephew,	 Dhritarashtra.
She	voluntary	chooses	to	bind	her	eyes	to	share	her	husband’s	blindness.	She	is	the	mother	of	Crown	Prince
Suyodhana	and	his	brothers,	the	Kauravas.	Her	brother	is	Shakuni.
Shakuni:	Prince	of	Gandhara,	Queen	Gandhari’s	younger	sibling,	and	maternal	uncle	to	the	Kauravas;	his	only
ambition	 is	 the	 destruction	 of	 the	 kingdoms	 of	 India	 in	 order	 to	 avenge	 himself	 against	 Bhishma	 for	 sacking

Gandhara,	killing	his	father	and	brothers,	and	abducting	his	sister.	Skilled	at	dice	and	intrigue,	he	always	carries
the	dice	made	from	the	thighbones	of	his	slain	father.
The	Kauravas:	the	legitimate	scions	of	the	Kuru	clan,	that	holds	suzerainty	over	all	the	kingdoms	north	of	the
Vindhya	 ranges.	 Crown	 Prince	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 hundred	 siblings	 are	 determined	 to	 hold	 onto	 what	 is
rightfully	theirs.
Suyodhana:	Usually	known	as	Duryodhana	(a	derogatory	term	signifying	‘one	who	does	not	know	how
to	use	weapons	or	power’),	is	a	name	given	to	him	by	his	detractors.	The	eldest	of	the	Kauravas,	and
Dhritarashtra	and	Gandhari’s	firstborn,	he	is	the	legitimate	Crown	Prince	of	Hastinapura.	This	book	is
about	his	fight	to	claim	his	birthright.	He	is	perhaps	the	most	celebrated	villain	in	Indian	mythology,	after
Ravana	of	the	Ramayana.	However,	here	we	see	him	as	loyal	and	generous	and	sometimes	brash	and
arrogant;	his	mind	is	set	against	the	taboos	and	convoluted	arguments	of	orthodoxy.
Sushasana:	Suyodhana’s	next	sibling;	more	famously	known	as	Dushasana.
Sushala:	The	only	girl	child	amongst	the	Kauravas,	she	is	known	as	Dushala	in	popular	lore;	she	is	also
the	loving	wife	of	Jayadratha,	King	of	Sindh.
Jayadratha:	King	of	Sindh,	he	is	Suyodhana’s	brother-in-law	and	loyal	friend.
Aswathama:	Suyodhana’s	 close	 friend	 and	 son	 of	 Guru	 Drona,	 this	 Brahmin	 youth	 refuses	 to	 blindly	 follow
tradition.	 He	 believes	 Suyodhana’s	 cause	 is	 just	 and	 is	 willing	 to	 fight	 even	 his	 illustrious	 father.	 He	 views
Arjuna	as	his	arch	foe.
Guru	Drona:	Teacher	to	both	the	Pandavas	and	Kauravas,	and	Aswathama’s	father;	he	will	do	anything	to
make	Arjuna	the	greatest	warrior	in	the	world.	His	love	for	his	disciple	is	legendary,	exceeded	only	by	his	love
for	 his	 son.	 Orthodox	 to	 the	 core,	 he	 believes	 in	 the	 superiority	 of	 his	 caste	 and	 that	 no	 lower	 castes	 should
have	the	privilege	of	knowledge.	The	poverty	of	his	early	life	haunts	him.
Ekalavya:	A	tribal	youth	who	desperately	wants	to	become	a	warrior;	he	is	ready	to	give	his	life	to	achieve
some	dignity	for	his	people.
Karna:	A	low	caste	Suta	and	son	of	a	charioteer,	he	is	willing	to	travel	to	the	Deep	South	to	become	a	warrior
par	excellence.	Generous,	charitable,	and	exceptionally	gifted,	he	is	Suyodhana’s	answer	to	Arjuna’s	challenge.
He	is	spurned	for	his	low	birth	and	insulted	by	Draupadi,	but	Suyodhana	staunchly	stands	by	him.
Parashurama:	 Drona,	 Kripa,	 and	 Karna’s	 Guru,	 friend-turned-foe	 of	 the	 Grand	 Regent,	 and	 the	 supreme
spiritual	leader	of	the	Southern	Confederate.	A	fanatical	Brahmin	and	the	greatest	living	warrior	of	the	times,
he	curses	Karna	for	duping	him	about	his	caste.	He	yearns	to	defeat	Hastinapura	and	bring	all	of	India	under
his	sway.	He	rues	the	peace	treaty	he	signed	with	the	Grand	Regent	years	ago	and	awaits	the	opportunity	to
ignite	a	great	war.
Kripa:	A	maverick	genius	as	well	as	a	learned	Brahmin	warrior,	he	does	not	believe	in	caste.	He	is	Drona’s
brother-in-law	 (his	 opposite),	 and	 Aswathama’s	 uncle.	 He	 believes	 Suyodhana	 has	 a	 point.	 A	 carefree	 soul
without	boundaries,	he	is	outspoken	to	the	point	of	arrogance	but	kind-hearted	beneath	his	rough	exterior.	He
believes	knowledge	ought	to	be	shared	freely.
Balarama:	Leader	of	the	Yadava	clan;	an	idealistic	dreamer	who	wishes	to	bring	prosperity	to	his	people	and
believes	 in	 the	 equality	 of	 all	 men.	 He	 sees	 the	 path	 to	 progress	 as	 lying	 in	 farming	 and	 trade.	 A	 pacifist	 at
heart,	he	builds	an	ideal	city	on	the	west	coast	of	India,	where	he	puts	his	ideas	into	practice.	He	longs	to	prove
one	 can	 rule	 without	 compromising	 one’s	 principles.	 Elder	 brother	 to	 Krishna	 and	 Subhadra,	 he	 is	 also
Suyodhana’s	 Guru	 and	 mentor,	 and	 inspires	 men	 like	 Karna	 to	 reach	 beyond	 the	 imposed	 limitations	 of	 their

caste.
Krishna:	A	Yadava	Prince	who	many	consider	an	avatar	of	Vishnu	–	part	of	the	Hindu	Trinity.	He	believes
he	 has	 come	 to	 this	 world	 to	 save	 it	 from	 evil.	 He	 is	 also	 Arjuna’s	 brother-in-law	 and	 mentor.	 He	 sees	 the
Great	War	as	the	inevitable	conflict	required	to	put	all	ambiguities	to	rest,	and	for	dharma	to	be	reinstated.	His
greatest	challenges	come	from	men	like	Jarasandha,	Suyodhana,	Karna,	Ekalavya,	and	Carvaka.
Subhadra:	Suyodhana’s	first	love,	and	later	wife	of	his	greatest	foe	–	Arjuna.
Takshaka:	Leader	of	the	rebel	Nagas,	he	wishes	for	a	revolution	whereby	the	Shudras	and	Untouchables	will
become	the	rulers	and	the	high	castes	their	slaves.	He	is	a	fierce	warrior	and	a	megalomaniac	dictator	in	the
making.
Vasuki:	 Deposed	 Naga	 King;	 he	 is	 old	 and	 frail,	 but	 desperately	 wants	 the	 kingship	 back.	 He	 believes
Takshaka	is	leading	his	people	to	destruction.
Jarasandha:	The	King	of	Magadha.	In	his	kingdom,	merit	rules	instead	of	caste.
General	Hiranayadhanus:	Father	of	Ekalavya	and	Commander-in-Chief	of	Jarasandha’s	army,	he	has	risen
from	the	lowliest	caste,	the	Nishadas,	by	dint	of	his	own	merit	and	the	friendship	of	King	Jarasandha.
Mayasura:	A	great	architect	and	a	low	caste	Asura.
Indra:	The	last	King	of	the	illustrious	Deva	Empire.	Living	in	penury	in	the	forest,	he	wants	to	make	a	secret
weapon	for	his	son,	Arjuna,	without	which	he	fears	his	son	is	doomed.
Dhaumya:	 An	 ambitious	 and	 unscrupulous	 Priest,	 he	 acts	 as	 Parashurama’s	 eyes,	 ears,	 and	 arm,	 in
Hastinapura.	 His	 aim	 is	 a	 perfect	 society	 where	 Priests	 will	 decree	 and	 the	 rest	 follow.	 He	 is	 Kunti	 and
Yudhishtra’s	chief	advisor.
Purochana:	A	corrupt	but	efficient	bureaucrat	in	league	with	Shakuni.
Durjaya:	A	man	of	the	gutters,	he	rules	the	dark	underworld	of	Hastinapura.	A	crime	lord,	he	engineers	riots,
and	 is	 in	 the	 pay	 of	 the	 Gandhara	 Prince,	 Shakuni.	 Krishna	 [black]	 Dwaipayana	 [born	 on	 an	 island]
Vedavyasa	 [chronicler	 of	 the	 Vedas]:	 A	 great	 scholar,	 and	 author	 of	 the	 Mahabharata,	 the
Mahabhagavatha	 (the	 longest	 epic	 in	 the	 world),	 and	 eighteen	 Puranas,	 he	 also	 codified	 and	 edited	 the
Vedas	and	is	considered	the	patron	saint	of	all	writers.	Son	of	Satyavathi	(a	fisherwoman)	and	Parashara,	he	is
the	Grand	Regent’s	step-brother.	He	is	also	the	biological	father	of	Pandu,	Dhritarashtra	and	Vidhura,	and	thus
the	grandfather	of	all	the	main	protagonists	of	the	Mahabharata.
And	finally,	the	most	unimportant	characters	in	the	book:
Jara	and	his	blind	dog	Dharma:	A	deformed	beggar,	Jara	lives	on	the	dusty	streets	of	India,	accompanied	by
his	blind	dog,	Dharma.	Illiterate,	ignorant,	frail,	and	dirt	poor,	he	is	one	of	the	many	who	believe	in	the	divinity
of	Krishna.	He	is	a	fervent	devotee	of	the	avatar.	An	Untouchable,	rejected	by	all	and	spurned	by	most,	yet
Jara	rejoices	in	the	blessings	of	his	beloved	God	and	celebrates	life.

Prelude
GANDHARA
IT	 WAS	 RAINING	 HEAVILY	 when	the	General	entered	the	palace.	Except	for	the	dull

rhythm	of	the	falling	rain,	the	palace	was	eerily	silent.	The	General	halted	at	the
foot	 of	 the	 wooden	 stairs,	 his	 heart	 filled	 with	 apprehension.	 Pools	 of	 water
formed	strange	patterns	at	his	feet	in	a	curious	shade	of	red,	made	more	prominent
by	 the	 lily	 whiteness	 of	 the	 cold	 marble	 floors.	 He	 adjusted	 his	 battledress	 and
winced	 as	 blinding	 pain	 shot	 through	 him.	 He	 was	 bleeding	 from	 many	 wounds,
yet	he	held	his	tall	and	powerful	frame	erect.	A	cold	wind	from	the	distant	snowcovered	 peaks	 ruffled	 his	 long,	 dark	 beard	 and	 pierced	 his	 body	 as	 if	 with	 icy
shards.	He	was	chilled	to	the	 bone,	unused	to	these	rugged	mountainous	terrains
and	snow-laden	passes.	He	was	from	the	East,	a	son	of	the	vast	Gangetic	plains.
The	naked	sword	he	gripped	in	his	right	hand	had	slain	scores	of	warriors	in	the
past	hour.
A	few	paces	apart,	his	men	stood	reverently.	The	rain	had	lost	its	fury	and	become
a	 drizzle.	 Rainwater	 dripped	 from	 the	 roof	 into	 the	 gutters,	 forming	 eddies	 of
darkness	before	rushing	down	the	mountainside	to	join	the	waters	flowing	through
the	distant	and	dusty	plains	to	the	sea,	carrying	with	it	human	flesh	and	the	blood
of	unknown	warriors	who	had	guarded	the	mountain	city	of	Gandhara	just	a	few
hours	before.
The	 General	 stood	 stiff	 and	 unmoving,	 frowning	 at	 the	 faint	 sounds	 of	 sobbing
coming	 from	 the	 floor	 above.	 Somewhere	 a	 cock	 crowed,	 followed	 by	 the
clucking	of	hens.	A	peddler	cried	out	his	wares	from	outside	the	fort	walls,	and	a
bullock	cart	passed	by,	the	jingling	of	its	bells	fading	away.	The	General	took	a
tentative	step	to	climb	the	stairs	but	stopped	again.	Something	had	caught	his	eye.
He	 bent	 down	 painfully	 and	 picked	 it	 up.	 It	 was	 a	 wooden	 cart	 with	 a	 broken
wheel	–	a	little	boy’s	toy.	A	smear	of	blood	had	dried	on	its	broken	side.	With	a
sigh,	the	General	started	climbing	up.	The	steps	groaned	in	protest.	As	if	on	cue,
the	sobbing	stopped.
The	long	verandah	ran	a	considerable	distance,	vanishing	into	shadow.	It	started
snowing	 and	 the	 white	 flakes	 fell	 on	 the	 wooden	 benches	 placed	 along	 the

corridor,	forming	strange	shapes.	The	General	walked	slowly,	careful	not	to	step
on	the	dead	soldiers.	He	held	the	broken	toy	in	his	left	hand	and	a	curved	Indian
sword	 in	 his	 right.	 He	 hated	 the	 snow	 and	 the	 bitter	 cold	 of	 the	 mountains	 and
longed	for	the	sunny	plains	of	his	homeland.	He	wished	only	to	finish	this	task	and
get	back	to	the	banks	of	the	Ganga.	He	paused	to	listen.	There	was	a	rustling	of
clothing	 and	 he	 sensed	 somebody	 waiting	 for	 him	 within.	 His	 wounded	 body
tensed.	 The	 toy	 in	 his	 hand	 had	 become	 a	 burden.	 ‘Why	 did	 I	 pick	 it	 up?’	 he
wondered.	 But	 now	 he	 did	 not	 now	 wish	 to	 throw	 it	 away.	 With	 the	 tip	 of	 his
sword,	he	slowly	pushed	at	the	half-open	door.	The	General	entered	the	room,	his
tall	and	broad	silhouette	throwing	dark	shadows	into	the	dim	room.	Once	his	eyes
had	 adjusted	 to	 the	 darkness,	 he	 saw	 her;	 partly	 veiled	 by	 the	 shadows	 that
cloaked	the	room.	She	sat	with	eyes	downcast	and	her	arms	wrapped	around	her
knees.	 She	 looked	 tired	 of	 waiting	 for	 her	 fate.	 The	 warrior’s	 tense	 muscles
relaxed	a	little	as	he	let	out	a	weary	sigh.	‘Thank	God,	no	more	bloodshed	today,’
he	thought.
An	oil	lamp	in	the	corner	apologetically	spread	a	small	circle	of	dull	light.	It	only
served	 to	 amplify	 the	 darkness	 beyond	 the	 reach	 of	 its	 frail	 aura.	 The	 General
turned	up	the	wick	and	a	golden	light	fell	upon	the	exquisitely	beautiful	woman.
‘My	fate	is	to	bring	unhappiness	to	such	beautiful	creations	of	divinity,’	he	thought
with	 sudden	 anger.	 He	 cursed	 the	 day	 he	 had	 impulsively	 taken	 the	 oath	 of
celibacy	to	satisfy	his	father’s	lust.	It	had	made	almost	all	the	women	in	his	life
unhappy	and	ruined	the	lives	of	some.	‘Today,	I	add	one	more	to	that	unhappy	list,’
he	 thought	 in	 frustration,	 and	 then	 ruefully	 chuckled	 at	 the	 irony	 of	 fate	 which
deigned	that	a	celibate	like	himself	should	hunt	women	and	spill	blood	for	them.
Pushing	aside	his	dark	thoughts,	the	General	made	an	elaborate	bow	to	the	lovely
woman	 before	 him.	 “Daughter,	 I	 am	 Gangadatta	 Devavrata,	 Grand	 Regent	 of
Hastinapura.	You	may	perhaps	have	heard	the	name	Bhishma.	I	have	come	to	seek
your	hand	in	marriage	for	my	nephew,	Dhritarashtra,	Prince	of	Hastinapura.”
In	 the	 thick	 silence	 that	 ensued,	 Bhishma	 kept	 his	 gaze	 averted	 from	 the	 lovely
grey	eyes	that	burned	with	such	fire.	In	the	years	to	come,	Bhishma	would	always
remember	those	eyes	staring	into	his	own,	even	when	they	were	hidden	from	the
world.	The	girl	let	out	a	wrenching	sob	that	pierced	his	heart.	Collecting	herself,
she	 stood	 up,	 raised	 her	 head,	 and	 said	 with	 majestic	 dignity,	 “Grand	 Regent
Bhishma,	I	trust	Gandhara	has	not	failed	in	its	hospitality	towards	you.	I	apologise
that	my	father	is	not	here	to	greet	you	himself.	I,	Gandhari,	Princess	of	Gandhara,

welcome	you	in	his	name.”
Bhishma	 stood	 paralysed	 by	 the	 icy	 chill	 of	 her	 voice.	 He	 felt	 a	 strange	 urge	 to
confess	everything	to	her;	to	justify	the	acts	he	had	been	forced	to	commit	for	the
sake	 of	 his	 kingdom.	 He	 felt	 small	 and	 mean	 before	 this	 young	 girl	 who	 carried
herself	with	such	dignity	and	composure	in	the	face	of	so	much	tragedy.	Bhishma
felt	like	a	brute.	He	wished	his	anger	would	return	so	that	he	could	take	her	by	her
narrow	waist	and	ride	off	to	Hastinapura	with	her,	like	a	warrior	of	fable.	But	he
could	not;	he	was	a	warrior	of	the	old	school	and	a	man	of	chivalry.
“I	do	not	have	a	choice	do	I,	Sir?	When	the	Regent	of	Hastinapura	decides	which
maiden	is	to	be	stolen	as	a	bride	for	his	nephew,	what	choice	do	we,	who	live	on
the	 borders	 of	 the	 great	 Indian	 empire,	 have?	 Do	 not	 perturb	 yourself…	 our
resistance	 is	 at	 an	 end.	 Gandhara	 has	 been	 routed	 as	 you	 intended.	 I	 am	 your
captive	and	shall	go	with	you	to	become	your	blind	nephew’s	bride.”
Bhishma	found	he	had	lost	the	ability	to	speak.	He	looked	into	the	distance,	at	the
snowy	slopes	of	the	mountains	and	thought	she	could	finish	him	off	right	now	with
a	quick	thrust	of	a	dagger	into	his	back.	Yet	he	did	not	want	to	face	her	and	gaze
into	those	grey	eyes.	Being	stabbed	by	this	beautiful	woman	would	be	a	good	way
to	end	his	dry	life;	it	was	better	than	knowing	such	beautiful	women	existed	in	the
world	but	all	he	could	do	was	steal	them	on	behalf	of	his	incompetent	or	impotent
nephews,	 or	 whichever	 fool	 sat	 on	 the	 throne	 of	 Hastinapura.	 Life	 had	 been	 a
series	 of	 battles,	 treachery,	 politics	 and	 intrigue,	 and	 he	 was	 weary	 of	 it	 –	 the
bloody	defence	of	others	–	his	father,	his	country,	his	brothers,	his	nephews,	but
never	for	himself.
He	was	sick	of	it	all.	Yet	there	was	no	warrior	in	the	whole	of	India,	no	King	or
Prince,	who	could	challenge	the	Regent	of	Hastinapura.
Bhishma	 walked	 away,	 half-expecting	 Gandhari	 to	 stab	 him	 and	 was	 rather
disappointed	when	she	followed	meekly.	As	they	reached	the	verandah,	a	sudden
blast	 of	 icy	 wind	 hit	 him	 and	 he	 shuddered.	 He	 turned	 back	 to	 see	 Gandhari
looking	 at	 the	 broken	 toy	 in	 his	 hand.	 He	 felt	 embarrassed,	 wanting	 to	 throw	 it
away	 or	 hide	 it	 from	 her	 gaze.	 Then	 he	 heard	 a	 sob.	 It	 did	 not	 come	 from	 the
lovely	woman	before	him,	but	from	somewhere	within	the	dark	depths	of	the	room
where	she	had	sat	waiting	for	him.	When	Gandhari	saw	that	he	had	heard	the	sob,
a	look	of	fear	and	pure	hatred	crossed	her	face.	Bhishma	moved	quickly	towards

the	room.	Gandhari	grabbed	at	his	arm	and	clawed	at	his	back,	trying	to	stop	him.
Venting	 the	 pent-up	 anger	 and	 frustration	 of	 many	 years,	 he	 pushed	 her	 back	 in
sudden	 fury	 and	 entered	 the	 room.	 Gandhari	 fell	 but	 was	 up	 and	 after	 him	 in	 a
trice,	trying	to	slow	him	down,	scratching	him	with	her	long	nails	and	biting	–	to
no	effect.
The	 sobs	 came	 from	 under	 the	 bed.	 The	 tall	 warrior	 bent	 down,	 his	 sword	 held
before	him	to	block	an	unexpected	thrust	from	a	sharp	weapon	that	could	slash	his
face.	 A	 small	 hand	 reached	 for	 the	 toy	 cart	 and	 then	 disappeared	 in	 a	 flash.	 But
Bhishma	 caught	 the	 small	 hand	 and	 pulled	 hard.	 It	 was	 a	 little	 boy,	 barely	 five
years	old.	Bhishma	carried	him	into	the	light	of	the	verandah	to	observe	him.	The
boy	was	covered	in	blood	but	unhurt	except	for	a	wound	on	his	left	leg.	His	large,
animal	eyes	looked	at	the	tough	warrior-prince	with	all	the	hatred	he	had	gathered
in	 his	 young	 life.	 It	 was	 at	 such	 moments	 that	 Bhishma	 hated	 himself.	 He	 could
face	 a	 thousand	 arrows	 on	 the	 battlefield	 but	 the	 little	 boy’s	 eyes	 pierced	 his
armour	and	reached	deep	into	his	heart.	His	Gurus	would	have	advised	him	not	to
spare	the	boy’s	life.	When	one	conquered	a	country,	it	was	prudent	to	finish	off	all
the	 males	 and	 take	 the	 women.	 It	 prevented	 misadventures	 and	 future	 wars	 of
revenge.	Bhishma	could	almost	hear	his	father’s	voice	prompting	him	to	thrust	his
sword	through	the	tiny	heart.
Slowly,	very	slowly,	Bhishma	put	the	boy	down.	He	 immediately	collapsed	onto
the	floor,	unable	to	stand	on	his	hurt	leg.	“Who	is	he?”	Bhishma	asked	Gandhari.
“He	is	Shakuni,	Prince	of	Gandhara.	I	know	you	will	kill	him.	That	is	the	dharma
of	the	Kshatriya,	is	it	not?	I	know	all	about	the	code	of	the	warrior.	But	I	beg	you
not	to	do	it	in	front	of	me.	He	is	my	little	brother...please	have	mercy…”	Gandhari
begged.
Bhishma	 stood	 up,	 embarrassed	 and	 unable	 to	 look	 at	 the	 haughty	 Princess	 in
distress	or	the	small	boy	who	lay	wheezing	at	his	feet.	His	sword	trembled	in	his
hand.	He	slowly	knelt	and	put	down	the	toy	cart	near	the	boy,	who	grabbed	at	it,
clutching	 it	 to	 his	 heart.	 Bhishma	 felt	 tears	 flood	 his	 eyes.	 He	 was	 irritated	 at
himself	for	his	weakness	and	pushed	the	boy	away.	Shakuni	let	out	a	howl	of	pain.
“I	 will	 not	 kill	 him.	 I	 can	 see	 how	 much	 you	 love	 him.	 Take	 him	 with	 you	 to
Hastinapura.	 He	 shall	 grow	 up	 there	 as	 a	 Prince	 of	 the	 Kurus,”	 Bhishma	 said,
hating	himself	every	moment	for	giving	in.

Gandhari	let	out	a	shuddering	sigh,	relieved	at	having	the	life	of	her	young	brother
saved.	Bhishma	stood	up	and	looked	at	them.	The	wind	had	become	stronger	and
he	shivered	in	the	cold.	Gandhari	picked	up	the	little	boy	in	her	arms,	stumbling
under	his	weight.	Bhishma	reached	out	and	took	Shakuni	from	her.	As	the	Grand
Regent	lifted	him,	the	boy	spat	into	his	face	with	all	the	hatred	he	could	muster.
Bhishma	 wiped	 the	 bloody	 saliva	 with	 the	 back	 of	 his	 hand	 and	 walked	 on,	 his
face	set	like	granite.
***

They	rode	back	to	the	dusty	plains	of	the	Ganges,	to	the	palace	in	the	eternal	city
of	elephants,	to	the	famed	capital	of	India	–	Hastinapura.	Shakuni	lay	limp	across
the	 saddle	 of	 the	 mighty	 warrior	 as	 the	 beautiful	 Princess	 of	 Gandhara	 galloped
behind.	 Throughout	 the	 journey,	 Bhishma	 was	 preoccupied	 with	 thoughts	 of
finding	a	bride	for	his	other	nephew,	the	albino	Pandu.	Experienced	warrior	that
he	was,	he	would	not	else	have	missed	the	hatred	burning	in	the	eyes	of	the	little
boy.	 It	 was	 the	 gravest	 mistake	 the	 Regent	 of	 the	 Kurus	 made	 in	 his	 long	 and
illustrious	life.

1	PRINCE	OF	THE	BLOOD
“I	 WILL	 FIND	 YOU	 SUYODHANA,	 and	 drag	 you	 out	 from	 whichever	 rat	 hole
you	are	hiding	in.	You	coward!	Come	out!	I	am	not	blind	like	your	father.	I	will
find	and	thrash	you...”	Bhima’s	booming	voice	echoed	through	the	corridors	of	the
Hastinapura	palace.
The	little	boy	cowered	under	the	massive	wooden	bed,	trembling	with	fear.	The
emptiness	 of	 the	 cavernous	 room	 oppressed	 him.	 Cloaked	 in	 the	 musty	 darkness
under	his	father’s	bed,	he	hoped	his	tormentor	would	not	find	him.	He	could	smell
the	 lingering	 traces	 of	 the	 faint	 and	 musky	 odour	 which	 clung	 to	 his	 father,	 and
wished	he	would	return	soon.	For	the	last	six	months,	every	day	had	been	like	this
–	being	chased	by	his	cousin	while	he	hid	under	the	bed	and	waited	with	thumping
heart	for	his	enemy	to	lose	interest	in	him	and	give	up,	while	he	cowered	in	fear.
Though	 a	 year	 younger,	 Bhima	 stood	 a	 foot	 taller	 than	 the	 pale	 and	 wispy
Suyodhana.	Bhima	took	pleasure	in	being	cruel	to	anyone	he	considered	weak.	He
was	something	of	a	lout.	What	he	lacked	in	brains	he	more	than	made	up	in	sheer
physical	prowess.
***

Suyodhana	 knew	 his	 fat	 cousin	 would	 be	 prowling	 the	 corridors	 of	 the	 palace
looking	for	him	as	well	as	his	brother.	‘I	hope	he	doesn’t	get	hold	of	Sushasana,’
he	 prayed.	 Sushasana	 was	 agile	 and	 could	 climb	 any	 tree.	 All	 the	 bulky	 fatso
below	could	do	then	was	throw	stones	at	his	agile	cousin,	who	made	faces	at	him.
Bhima’s	aim	was	so	poor	that	more	than	once	he	had	broken	a	window	and	been
reprimanded	 by	 their	 stern	 Granduncle,	 Bhishma.	 Knowing	 Suyodhana	 adored
Sushala,	 his	 sister,	 Bhima	 also	 took	 great	 pleasure	 in	 making	 the	 little	 girl	 cry
when	 her	 brothers	 were	 around.	 Invariably	 Suyodhana	 or	 Sushasana	 would	 get
into	a	fight	with	their	fat	cousin	over	this.	If	none	of	the	elders	were	around	to	stop
it	from	becoming	bloody,	the	squabble	would	develop	into	a	brawl,	with	the	other
four	brothers	of	the	fat	boy	joining	in.
But	 it	 was	 not	 Bhima	 whom	 Suyodhana	 hated	 the	 most.	 Of	 his	 five	 Pandava
cousins,	sons	of	his	dead	uncle,	Pandu,	he	most	feared	Yudhishtra,	the	eldest.	Had

not	 his	 Uncle	Shakuni	 warned	him	repeatedly	 about	 his	 pious	 cousin?	 While	the
young	 boy	 did	 not	 understand	 the	 inheritance	 and	 political	 issues	 Uncle	 Shakuni
kept	talking	to	him	about,	he	hated	the	sheer	hypocrisy	of	his	eldest	cousin,	who
was	 ten	 years	 old,	 almost	 the	 same	 age	 as	 he	 was.	 Yudhishtra	 behaved	 as	 if	 he
was	 the	 most	 obedient,	 god-fearing	 and	 innocent	 boy	 in	 the	 world,	 but	 his	 kicks
were	 often	 the	 most	 vicious	 in	 a	 fight.	 Suyodhana	 could	 understand	 Bhima’s
brutishness,	 but	 his	 eldest	 cousin’s	 aggression	 confused	 him.	 In	 the	 presence	 of
their	elders,	Yudhishtra	was	always	sweet	and	loving	towards	his	cousins,	so	his
vile	behaviour	when	they	were	alone	baffled	all	the	children.
Many	a	time,	when	Mother	Kunti	or	Aunt	Gandhari	was	present,	Yudhishtra	would
affectionately	kiss	Suyodhana	or	Sushasana.	Not	that	Gandhari	could	see.	She	had
chosen	to	be	blind	like	her	husband	and	so	bound	her	eyes.	And	that	was	another
thing	which	confused	little	Suyodhana.	Why	would	anyone	refuse	to	look	upon	this
beautiful	 world?	 Uncle	 Shakuni	 had	 once	 told	 him	 that	 she	 did	 it	 as	 a	 mark	 of
protest	 against	 their	 Granduncle	 Bhishma,	 who	 had	 forced	 her	 to	 marry	 a	 blind
man.	But	those	words	only	served	to	confuse	Suyodhana	further.	Did	that	mean	his
mother	did	not	love	his	father,	Dhritarashtra,	the	King?	He	had	asked	his	mother
once	whether	Uncle	Shakuni	was	right;	that	she	had	chosen	permanent	darkness	as
a	 mark	 of	 protest.	 But	 she	 had	 just	 laughed	 and	 ruffled	 his	 hair	 affectionately.
Gandhari	had	not	answered	him.	But	he	had	seen	a	damp	patch	form	on	the	white
silk	cloth	that	covered	her	eyes.	Had	she	been	weeping?
How	 Suyodhana	 wished	 he	 had	 been	 born	 the	 child	 of	 common	 people.	 Uncle
Shakuni	had	also	told	him	that	his	paternal	uncle,	Vidhura,	was	the	son	of	a	palace
maid	and	had	been	fathered	by	the	same	man	who	was	the	natural	father	of	both
King	Dhritarashtra	and	his	brother,	Pandu.
“So	 what?”	 the	 little	 boy	 had	 asked	 puzzled.	 And	 Shakuni	 had	 answered	 that	 he
would	 understand	 when	 he	 grew	 up.	 This	 had	 disappointed	 Suyodhana.	 ‘When
will	 I	 grow	 up?’	 he	 wondered	 wistfully.	 Perhaps	 he	 would	 then	 have	 enough
strength	to	get	even	with	his	tormentor.	For	now,	he	was	all	alone,	hiding	in	the
shadows	and	praying	that	his	large	cousin	would	not	find	him.
***

“I	 know	 you	 are	 hiding	 under	 your	 father’s	 bed,	 you	 son	 of	 a	 blind	 fool.	 I’m
coming	to	kick	your	thick	head...”

‘Oh	Shiva!	He	has	found	me;	he	will	get	me	now.’	Suyodhana’s	heart	thumped	in
his	 chest.	 Silhouetted	 against	 the	 fading	 light	 of	 the	 setting	 sun,	 Bhima’s	 hulking
frame	cast	a	long	shadow	on	the	opposite	wall.	Suyodhana	could	only	see	his	legs,
but	 that	 was	 frightening	 enough.	 He	 wanted	 to	 cry	 out	 but	 knew	 nobody	 would
come	 to	 his	 aid.	 He	 felt	 all	 alone	 in	 this	 cruel	 world,	 which	 was	 conspiring
against	him.	Another	shadow	fell	against	the	wall.	Was	it	Bhima’s	younger	brother
Arjuna,	 coming	 to	 take	 part	 in	 the	 fun?	 Suyodhana	 crouched	 deeper	 into	 the
darkness	under	the	bed.
“Bhima,	what	are	you	doing	here?”	It	was	an	adult’s	voice.	Suyodhana	peeped	out
carefully.	 Who	 was	 it?	 The	 setting	 sun	 emblazoned	 everything	 behind	 the
doorframe	in	red	and	gold	and	this	person	stood	like	an	unmoving	black	shadow.
Bhima’s	 head	 turned	 in	 surprise	 at	 this	 interference.	 Suyodhana	 saw	 anger	 flash
across	his	cousin’s	face.
“Why	are	you	always	after	me?	I	will	tell	my	mother.”	Though	Bhima	had	raised
his	 voice,	 there	 was	 some	 doubt	 in	 it.	 Suyodhana	 began	 creeping	 out	 from	 his
hiding	place.
“I	saw	you	chasing	the	little	Prince	and	I	know	you	mean	mischief.	So	I	came	after
you.”
“But	we	were	just	playing...”
“I	do	not	call	that	playing.”
“Uncle	Vidhura,	what	are	you	doing	here?	You	know	these	places	are	forbidden	to
people	like	you.”	Bhima	had	regained	his	confidence	and	decided	that	attack	was
his	 best	defence.	He	knew	well	how	much	that	underhanded	jibe	would	hurt	his
uncle.
Suyodhana	saw	his	uncle’s	shoulders	stoop.	‘Should	I	go	back	under	the	bed?’	he
wondered.
Vidhura	looked	around,	as	if	to	ascertain	no	one	was	near	and	then	moved	closer
to	Bhima,	who	took	a	few	steps	back.	“Let	us	decide	this	before	Lord	Bhishma.”
“I’m	sorry	Uncle,	really	sorry!	I	will	go	away.”	Bhima	threw	a	hate-filled	glance

towards	 Suyodhana	 and	 walked	 out	 of	 the	 room	 with	 an	 elaborate	 show	 of
avoiding	any	bodily	contact	with	Vidhura.
Suyodhana	felt	a	rush	of	gratitude	towards	his	uncle.	He	ran	forward	and	hugged
the	tall,	dark	figure.	For	a	moment,	Vidhura	was	taken	aback.	Then	he	pushed	his
nephew	 away	 gently.	 Suyodhana	 looked	 at	 his	 uncle,	 hurt	 showing	 on	 his	 young
face.
“Prince	 Suyodhana,	 you	 know	 you	 should	 not	 do	 that.	 You	 cannot	 touch	 me,
especially	 after	 you	 have	 already	 had	 your	 bath	 and	 should	 be	 getting	 ready	 for
evening	prayers.”
“But	you	are	my	Uncle!”	cried	the	young	Prince.	He	wanted	to	add	that	his	uncle
had	just	saved	him	from	his	worst	enemy.
When	Vidhura	spoke,	the	little	boy	could	feel	the	pain	that	lay	hidden	within	his
simple	 words.	 “Nevertheless,	 you	 should	 not,	 my	 boy.”	 The	 dark	 and	 handsome
man	stood	gazing	into	the	dusk.
“But	why	not?”
“Enough!	I	should	not	be	here.”	Vidhura	began	to	walk	away.
Suyodhana	ran	after	his	uncle	and	pulled	at	his	arm.	Vidhura	hastily	pulled	away.
“But	tell	me	why.”
“You	will	not	understand	now,	Suyodhana,	but	when	you	are	older,	you	will.	Now
let	me	go.”	Vidhura	turned	and	walked	quickly	down	the	long	corridor.
Suyodhana	 watched	 his	 uncle	 go,	 sadness	 and	 confusion	 clamouring	 in	 his	 mind
and	heart.	The	sun	had	set	and	darkness	had	spread	its	mantle	over	Hastinapura.
The	boy	stood	there,	his	body	trembling	with	emotion.	As	he	turned	to	go	back	to
his	father’s	room,	he	yearned	to	grow	up	quickly	so	he	could	find	answers	to	the
questions	 that	 troubled	 his	 mind	 and	 which	 all	 the	 elders	 evaded.	 Then	 he
remembered	the	pain	in	his	uncle’s	eyes.	Perhaps	being	grown	up	was	not	such	a
good	thing	after	all.
***

Suyodhana	felt	a	desperate	need	to	talk	to	his	Uncle	Shakuni	about	Bhima.	Perhaps
he	 was	 in	 the	 sabha.	 How	 Suyodhana	 hated	 his	 cousins!	 Uncle	 Pandu	 had	 been
dead	 six	 months	 now	 and	 his	 cousins	 were	 still	 receiving	 condolences	 and
sympathy	on	their	bereavement.	That	only	made	them	more	obnoxious.	They	had
added	privileges	now,	with	their	mother	wielding	more	power	than	ever	before.
Uncle	Pandu’s	second	wife,	Aunt	Madri,	had	committed	sati	on	his	pyre	and	Aunt
Kunti	had	then	arrived	at	the	palace,	bringing	Aunt	Madri’s	twin	boys	along	with
her	own	three	sons.
Suyodhana	did	not	relish	the	thought	of	going	to	the	sabha.	He	prayed	there	were
no	heated	debates	taking	place,	as	there	had	been	twice	in	recent	months.	The	first
had	 been	 when	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 had	 decided	 to	 make	 Vidhura,	 the	 Prime
Minister.	 Suyodhana	 had	 been	 sitting	 with	 his	 Uncle	 Shakuni,	 when	 the	 Grand
Regent	stood	up	to	make	that	historic	announcement.
“Today	 is	 a	 special	 day	 for	 Hastinapura.	 With	 the	 consent	 of	 His	 Highness
Dhritarashtra,	I	appoint	the	sagacious	and	learned	scholar	Vidhura,	Prime	Minister
of	Hastinapura.”	The	sabha	had	immediately	erupted	into	an	uproar.
“But	 your	 Excellency,	 he	 is	 a	 Shudra;	 the	 son	 of	 a	 palace	 maid!”	 Dhaumya,	 a
young	Priest	stood	up	and	shouted	over	the	din.	Suyodhana	looked	up	at	Shakuni,
who	sat	with	a	smug	smile	on	his	face,	gently	caressing	his	knees.
Bhishma	 raised	 his	 hands	 and	 the	 murmurings	 died	 away.	 “Sri	Dhaumya,	 must	 I
remind	 you	 that	 like	 His	 Highness	 Dhritarashtra	 and	 the	 deceased	 King	 Pandu,
Vidhura	too,	is	the	grandson	of	my	father	Shantanu?”
“But	Sir...”
“Must	I	remind	you	that	the	King’s	grandmother,	Satyavathi,	was	a	fisherwoman,
who	wed	my	father,	a	blue-blooded	Kshatriya?	Must	I	remind	you	that	when	her
son	Vichitraveera	died	without	an	heir	to	continue	the	line,	the	same	fisherwoman
dared	to	overrule	men	like	yourself	and	call	upon	her	other	son,	the	sage	Vyasa,	to
impregnate	 her	 widowed	 daughters-in-law,	 according	 to	 the	 ancient	 custom	 of
niyoga?”
“Sir,	niyoga	is...”

“Dhaumya,	 keep	 your	 sermons	 to	 yourself.	 Tell	 me	 who	 Krishna	 Dwaipayana
Vyasa	 is?”	 The	 young	 Priest	 squirmed	 at	 the	 question.	 “Why	 do	 you	 feel	 so
embarrassed	 to	 speak	 the	 truth?	 Vyasa	 is	 the	 illegitimate	 son	 of	 my	 stepmother
Satyavathi,	 fathered	 by	 the	 sage	 Parashara,	 before	 her	 marriage	 to	 my	 father.
Vyasa,	 the	 son	 of	 a	 fisherwoman,	 is	 the	 father	 of	 Dhritarashtra,	 Pandu,	 and
Vidhura.	 So	 which	 caste	 does	 Vidhura	 belong	 to?”	 Bhishma	 asked	 with	 a
mischievous	smile	on	his	usually	stern	face.
“Bhishma	 got	 him	 there!”	 Shakuni	 whispered	 into	 Suyodhana’s	 ears.	 Suyodhana
looked	at	his	uncle	for	an	explanation.	Shakuni	explained	to	the	young	boy	that	the
Grand	Regent	had	beautifully	tied	Dhaumya	into	a	knot	using	his	own	arguments
against	him.	If	the	young	Priest	said	Vidhura	was	a	Shudra,	because	of	his	mother,
then	 the	 entire	 Kuru	 lineage	 became	 Shudra,	 because	 their	 grandmother	 was	 a
fisherwoman.	 Questioning	 Vidhura’s	 legitimacy	 was	 like	 questioning	 the	 King’s
lineage.
Dhaumya	 knew	 he	 was	 beaten.	 Suyodhana	 watched	 him	 sit	 down	 sullenly.	 The
new	 Prime	 Minister	 then	 took	 an	 oath	 to	 serve	 the	 kingdom	 until	 the	 day	 of	 his
death.
Though	 Shakuni	 had	 effusively	 congratulated	 the	 new	 Prime	 Minister	 that	 day,
Suyodhana	somehow	felt	that	they	disliked	each	other	intensely.
Suyodhana	vividly	remembered	the	second	debate	as	well.	It	had	all	started	with
his	 aunt	 Kunti	 requesting	 Bhishma	 to	 permit	 her	 to	 attend	 the	 sabha.	 When	 the
Grand	 Regent	 announced	 his	 decision,	 Dhaumya	 angrily	 remarked	 that	 it	 was
unprecedented	 for	 women	 to	 be	 present	 in	 the	 sabha.	 The	 orthodox	 Brahmin
quoted	various	smritis	regarding	widows	not	being	permitted	to	be	seen	in	public,
let	alone	holding	positions	of	power.
Bhishma	 placed	 Vidhura	 in	 the	 forefront	 of	 this	 battle	 against	 orthodoxy	 and	 the
scholar	 put	 the	 learned	 Brahmins	 to	 shame	 by	 eloquently	 quoting	 the	 Vedas	 and
overwhelming	 them	 with	 examples	 of	 women,	 including	 widows,	 playing
prominent	 roles	 in	 the	 country’s	 affairs	 from	 ancient	 times.	 When	 logic	 did	 not
work,	the	Priests	began	abusing	the	man,	saying	Vidhura	did	not	have	the	authority
to	 study	 the	 Vedas	 and	 thus	 there	 was	 no	 question	 of	 his	 quoting	 scripture.
Suyodhana	could	still	feel	Vidhura’s	pain.

Fortunately	for	the	beleaguered	Prime	Minister,	the	travelling	ascetic	and	greatest
living	scholar	of	the	Vedas,	Krishna	Dwaipayana	Vyasa,	walked	into	the	court	that
day.	Bhishma	and	even	the	blind	King,	rose	from	their	seats	to	touch	the	feet	of	the
great	 man.	 When	 Bhishma	 sought	 his	 advice	 on	 the	 ticklish	 question,	 the	 sage
quietened	 the	 raging	 war	 of	 words	 with	 his	 characteristic	 humour	 and	 wisdom.
Considered	 the	 final	 authority	 on	 all	 scriptures,	 he	 was	 in	 the	 process	 of
codifying,	 arranging	 and	 recording	 India’s	 ancient	 oral	 literature.	 He	 told	 the
Priests	that	Vidhura	was	right.
“What	 right	 has	 a	 Shudra	 to	 quote	 the	 scriptures?	 Guru,	 perhaps	 you	 empathise
with	 him	 because	 of	 your	 special	 relationship	 to	 Vidhura,”	 Dhaumya	 said,
smirking	at	his	supporters.
When	 Suyodhana	 asked	 his	 uncle	 what	 the	 Priest	 had	 meant	 by	 that	 remark,
Shakuni	 told	 him	 to	 keep	 quiet.	 But	 Suyodhana	 could	 feel	 the	 tension	 in	 the	 air.
Shakuni	was	observing	the	sage	intently.
In	response	to	Dhaumya’s	barbed	comment,	Vyasa	chuckled.	“Why	don’t	you	say
what	you	mean,	young	man?	I	am	a	Shudra.	Moreover,	I	was	born	out	of	wedlock.
I	 am	 the	 illegitimate	 child	 of	 a	 dark-skinned	 fisherwoman	 and	 the	 scholarly
Brahmin,	 Parashara,	 who	 did	 not	 think	 twice	 about	 my	 caste	 when	 imparting
knowledge	of	the	scriptures	to	me.”
The	Priests	stood	writhing	before	him	in	discomfort.
“I	have	added	to	my	father’s	teachings	by	virtue	of	the	knowledge	gained	through
my	travels	and	discourses	with	saints	and	scholars	throughout	this	land.	None	of
these	 savants	 ever	 asked	 me	 what	 my	 caste	 was.	 I	 have	 travelled	 from	 the
Himalayas	to	the	holy	city	where	the	three	oceans	meet,	and	no	scholar	asked	me
which	 language	 or	 dialect	 I	 spoke	 at	 home.	 They	 came	 from	 all	 classes	 and
creeds,	and	differed	in	their	thoughts,	yet	they	all	spoke	the	universal	language	of
love	 towards	 humankind.	 They	 lived	 far	 from	 the	 cities	 and	 shunned	 worldly
comforts	for	the	serenity	of	the	forests.	They	neither	clung	to	power	nor	claimed
supremacy	by	accident	of	birth.	They	did	not	write	smritis	or	believe	in	them.	Yet
here	you	are,	using	your	scholarship	and	intellect	to	divide	people	based	on	caste,
creed	 and	 dialect;	 while	 the	 truly	 great	 ones	 only	 sought	 the	 betterment	 of	 the
whole	 world.	 Therein	 lies	 the	 difference.	 I	 pray	 God	 grant	 you	 the	 wisdom	 to
know	the	Truth.	Should	the	likes	of	Parashurama	prevail,	I	foresee	bloodshed	and

war	for	this	holy	land	of	India.”
There	was	perfect	silence	in	the	sabha.	 Suyodhana	 winced	 in	 pain	 as	 Shakuni’s
grip	tightened	on	his	shoulder.	He	tried	to	wriggle	away	but	when	he	looked	at	his
uncle’s	 face,	 he	 suddenly	 felt	 afraid.	 Shakuni	 was	 staring	 at	 the	 sage	 with	 open
hostility.	Shakuni	looked	down	at	his	nephew	and	his	face	relaxed	as	he	loosened
his	grip.
“Kunti	 may	 attend	 the	 sabha,”	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 pronounced	 to	 a	 smattering	 of
applause.
Shakuni	stood	up	to	his	full,	imperious	height.	“Your	Excellency,	then	what	about
my	sister,	Gandhari?	Is	she	too,	not	qualified	to	attend	the	sabha?”
Bhishma	stared	at	him	for	a	long	time	and	finally	said,	“Why	not?	It	is	a	positive
step	 forward.	 Like	 the	 women	 of	 yore,	 let	 Gandhari	 and	 Kunti	 bless	 our	 sabha
with	their	wisdom.”
Shakuni	sat	down,	winking	at	Suyodhana,	as	the	sage	Vyasa	walked	away	shaking
his	head.	Suyodhana	still	rued	that	day.	Now	Gandhari	no	longer	had	time	for	her
children,	 preoccupied	 as	 she	 was	 with	 countering	 Kunti’s	 moves.	 The	 palace
crackled	with	intrigue	and	conspiracy	between	the	two	powerful	women,	fighting
for	the	future	of	their	children.	Even	as	a	ten-year-old,	Suyodhana	could	feel	the
tension	 in	the	air.	The	Royal	men,	however,	appeared	oblivious	to	the	cold	war
between	the	women.
“See	how	the	Priests	favour	Kunti	over	your	mother,”	Shakuni	had	pointed	out	to
him	on	another	occasion.	The	same	Priests	had	objected	to	Kunti’s	presence	just	a
few	 weeks	 ago.	 Shakuni	 chuckled	 at	 Suyodhana’s	 confusion.	 “Your	 aunt	 has
endeared	herself	to	those	fanatics.	She	holds	more	fundamentalist	views	than	even
Dhaumya.	If	you	do	not	watch	out	young	man,	one	day	they	are	going	to	throw	you
and	your	brothers	out	into	the	street	like	beggars,	not	to	mention	your	parents.”
“But	Uncle...”	Suyodhana	looked	up	at	Shakuni’s	crooked	smile	with	his	innocent
dark	eyes.
“Do	not	worry	son,	I	am	there	to	take	care	of	you,”	Shakuni	said,	ruffling	the	boy’s
hair	affectionately.

Now,	 after	 his	 narrow	 escape	 from	 Bhima,	 he	 wanted	 the	 comfort	 of	 Shakuni’s
presence.	 Suyodhana	 walked	 through	 the	 long	 corridors.	 Servants	 were	 lighting
the	 oil	 lamps	 affixed	 to	 the	 walls.	 He	 could	 hear	 sounds	 coming	 from	 the	 great
hall.	 He	 entered	 the	 well-lit	 sabha,	 acknowledging	 the	 bows	 of	 the	 guards
stationed	 at	 the	 door.	 Dhritarashtra,	 King	 of	 Hastinapura,	 sat	 on	 a	 bejewelled
throne.	 His	 priceless	 crown	 reflected	 golden	 lights	 from	 the	 crystal	 chandeliers
that	 hung	 from	 the	 carved	 ceiling.	 Near	 him,	 in	 an	 equally	 magnificent	 chair,	 sat
Bhishma,	Grand	Regent	of	the	Kurus.	Shakuni	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.
Suyodhana	 watched	 his	 Granduncle	 Bhishma,	 engrossed	 in	 correspondence,
intervening	 only	 when	 he	 felt	 the	 assembly	 needed	 his	 advice.	 Prime	 Minister
Vidhura	 stood	 at	 his	 side,	 taking	 notes.	 Uncle	 Vidhura	 was	 someone	 Suyodhana
liked,	 though	 he	 did	 not	 understand	 why	 everyone,	 including	 his	 own	 parents,
treated	 him	 with	 a	 hint	 of	 contempt.	 Suyodhana	 tried	 to	 attract	 Gandhari’s
attention,	but	it	was	Bhishma	who	 noticed	him,	and	called	him	to	sit	on	his	lap.
Suyodhana	considered	himself	too	old	to	sit	on	anyone’s	lap	but	obliged	the	old
man	 for	 a	 few	 minutes.	 He	 planted	 a	 quick,	 embarrassed	 kiss	 on	 the	 grandsire’s
cheek	 when	 he	 insisted,	 and	 then	 hopped	 down	 and	 ran	 away,	 the	 indulgent
laughter	of	the	assembly	ringing	in	his	burning	ears.	He	wanted	to	see	his	Uncle
Shakuni.

2	THE	TEACHER	COMES
SUYODHANA	 SAW	 THEM	 AS	 THREE	 dark	 shadows	 on	 the	 horizon,	 slowly	 growing

bigger	as	they	approached	Hastinapura.	It	was	early	and	he	was	dangling	from	the
groaning	 branch	 of	 a	 mango	 tree.	 His	 brother	 Sushasana	 had	 already	 climbed
higher	 and	 was	 throwing	 down	 the	 ripe	 mangoes.	 Their	 sister,	 Sushala,	 was
running	 here	 and	 there,	 trying	 to	 collect	 the	 mangoes	 in	 her	 outspread	 skirt.
Squirrels	chirped	angrily	at	this	intrusion.
Though	 it	was	early,	the	 summer	day	was	getting	hotter	and	dustier.	But	like	the
other	 children,	 the	 three	 siblings	 were	 indifferent	 to	 the	 heat.	 The	 ripe	 smell	 of
sweet	 mangoes	 was	 far	 more	 compelling	 than	 the	 travails	 of	 summer.	 Besides,
Guru	 Kripacharya’s	 training	 class	 would	 be	 starting	 soon	 and	 then	 it	 would	 be
difficult	 to	 sneak	 off	 to	 the	 mango	 groves	 outside	 the	 fort.	 They	 had	 discovered
this	 mango	 tree	 at	 the	 edge	 of	 a	 cliff	 quite	 accidentally	 the	 previous	 evening.
Normally,	 the	 gluttonous	 Bhima	 finished	 off	 even	 the	 raw	 mangoes	 and
mercilessly	 beat	 up	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 siblings	 if	 they	 dared	 go	 near	 the	 grove.
The	palace	guards	usually	looked	the	other	way	since	they	knew	whom	to	please
and	where	the	real	power	lay.
Seeing	that	his	five	cousins	were	down	by	the	cliff,	Suyodhana	felt	safe	from	the
goon.	 He	 could	 see	 them	 from	 his	 vantage	 point	 on	 the	 branch.	 The	 eldest,
Yudhishtra,	was	sitting	cross-legged,	meditating	with	a	seriousness	that	belied	his
youth.	 Bhima	 was	 chasing	 a	 mongrel	 dog.	 Arjuna	 was	 practicing	 archery,	 his
concentration	unwavering	as	he	aimed	at	his	target.	With	a	shudder,	the	Prince	saw
that	 Arjuna	 was	 aiming	 at	 a	 nest	 where	 a	 bird	 was	 feeding	 its	 little	 ones.
Suyodhana	wanted	to	shout	out	a	warning,	but	before	he	could,	Arjuna	had	shot	his
arrow.	Fortunately,	it	just	missed	its	mark.	Arjuna	stamped	his	foot	in	disgust.	The
twins,	Nakula	and	Sahadeva,	were	playing	with	a	cloth	ball.
The	three	figures	Suyodhana	had	spotted	earlier,	turned	out	to	be	a	Brahmin,	his
wife,	and	their	son,	who	looked	to	be	about	eight	years	old.	Suyodhana	watched
the	 tall,	 fair	 Brahmin	 with	 the	 dark	 flowing	 beard,	 approach	 Arjuna.	 Behind	 the
Brahmin	 stood	 his	 wife,	 an	 emaciated	 and	 frail	 woman,	 who	 appeared	 ready	 to

collapse.	 The	 boy	 with	 them	 stood	 still,	 his	 big	 black	 eyes	 filled	 with
wonderment.	 Bhima	 moved	 menacingly	 towards	 the	 little	 boy,	 rolling	 his	 eyes.
The	 boy’s	 father	 was	 talking	 to	 Arjuna	 and	 did	 not	 see	 it.	 The	 boy	 clutched	 his
mother’s	hand	in	fright	as	the	bully	grinned,	pointing	at	him.	Suyodhana	wanted	to
run	down	the	cliff	and	fight	Bhima.	He	might	not	win	and	Bhima	would	probably
thrash	 both	 him	 and	 his	 brother,	 but	 at	 least	 it	 would	 give	 the	 frail	 boy	 time	 to
escape.
Sushasana	 had	 also	 seen	 Bhima.	 Picking	 up	 the	 biggest	 mango	 at	 hand,	 he	 stood
poised	to	hurl	it	from	the	top	of	the	tree.	Suyodhana	smiled	at	the	thought	of	the
ripe	mango	splattering	on	Bhima’s	fat	face.
The	Pandava	twins	came	running	excitedly	and	said	something.	The	wind	carried
their	 voices	 to	 the	 top	 of	 the	 cliff	 and	 the	 Prince	 faintly	 heard	 that	 they	 had	 lost
their	 cloth	 ball	 in	 a	 well.	 Bhima	 lost	 interest	 in	 the	 little	 Brahmin	 boy	 and	 ran
towards	 the	 well.	 Sushasana,	 who	 had	 already	 let	 fly	 the	 ripe	 mango	 at	 Bhima,
saw	it	miss	and	land	on	the	ground,	and	roll	towards	a	bush.
“Bhai,	you	threw	away	our	best	mango,”	whined	little	Sushala.
“Shut	up!”	hissed	Sushasana,	while	Suyodhana	smiled	down	at	his	pouting	sister.
Meanwhile,	 Yudhishtra	 had	 uncoiled	 himself	 from	 his	 meditative	 pose	 and	 was
speaking	reverently	to	the	Brahmin,	bowing	and	touching	his	feet	and	behaving	in
the	 obsequious	 manner	 Suyodhana	 had	 come	 to	 despise	 in	 his	 eldest	 cousin.
Bhima	was	leaning	over	the	low	wall	of	the	well	while	the	twins	pointed	to	their
ball	floating	in	the	water	far	below.
“Suyodhana,	I	wish	I	could	tip	fatso	over	the	wall,”	said	Sushasana	wistfully	and
Suyodhana	almost	laughed	aloud.
Yudhishtra	led	the	Brahmin	towards	the	well,	with	Arjuna	following	with	his	bow
held	 firmly	 in	 his	 hand.	 The	 frail	 woman	 trailed	 behind.	 Two	 soldiers	 stood	 on
guard	at	the	gate	of	the	fort;	their	faces	mirror	images	of	boredom.	The	Brahmin
peered	 into	 the	 well	 and	 then	 slung	 down	 the	 bow	 he	 was	 carrying	 over	 his
shoulder.	He	took	an	arrow	from	his	quiver	and	tied	the	end	of	his	angavasthra	to
its	blunt	end.	Then	he	uncoiled	the	rope,	which	bound	his	belongings	and	tied	it	to
the	end	of	the	angavasthra.	He	leaned	precariously	over	the	well	wall,	and	taking

careful	aim,	shot	the	arrow	into	the	dark	depths.	From	the	cheers	of	the	Pandava
brothers,	Suyodhana	could	tell	the	Brahmin	had	found	his	mark.
Suyodhana	looked	at	his	brother,	who	was	watching	the	scene	with	astonishment.
It	 was	 quite	 a	 feat	 to	 shoot	 a	 ball	 bobbing	 on	 the	 water	 thirty	 feet	 down	 a	 dark
well.	The	Brahmin	pulled	out	the	ball,	detached	it	from	the	sharp	tip	of	his	arrow,
and	 placed	 it	 into	 the	 outstretched	 hands	 of	 Sahadeva,	 the	 youngest	 Pandava.
Arjuna	fell	at	the	Brahmin’s	feet	but	was	lifted	up	with	a	tenderness	bordering	on
devotion.
Suyodhana	 could	 see	 the	 Brahmin	 consulting	 his	 five	 cousins	 about	 something.
Yudhishtra	was	pointing	excitedly	towards	the	palace.	Bhima	stood	there	wearing
the	 look	 of	 someone	 trying	 hard	 to	 understand	 what	 was	 going	 on.	 Suyodhana’s
eyes	 wandered	 away	 to	 rest	 on	 the	 small	 Brahmin	 boy,	 who	 lingered	 a	 few	 feet
away	from	his	parents.	The	boy	looked	around	and	his	eyes	locked	onto	the	ripe
yellow	mango	gleaming	in	the	sun.	He	gazed	longingly	at	the	fruit	and	then	darted
towards	 it.	 He	 was	 about	 to	 touch	 it	 when	 a	 small	 dark	 figure	 jumped	 out	 from
behind	a	bush	and	in	a	swift	movement,	grabbed	the	mango	from	the	sand,	leapt
over	the	startled	boy,	and	ran	off	as	if	his	life	depended	on	it.	The	stupefied	boy
gave	 chase.	 The	 intruder	 was	 looking	 back	 as	 he	 ran	 and	 so	 did	 not	 see	 the
looming	figure	of	Bhima	standing	in	his	path.	It	was	only	at	the	last	moment	that	he
turned	to	see	the	huge	Pandava	staring	menacingly	at	him.	Bhima	stood	in	combat
position,	 and	 just	 as	 the	 boy	 reached	 him,	 he	 threw	 a	 deadly	 punch	 at	 the	 boy’s
head.	The	boy	ducked	and	in	one	fluid	moment,	without	breaking	stride,	swooped
down	and	pulled	hard	at	Bhima’s	legs.	Bhima	fell	flat	on	his	face.
Suyodhana	and	Sushasana	could	not	control	themselves	any	longer.	They	laughed
aloud,	 clutching	 their	 bellies,	 while	 Sushala	 joined	 in,	 clapping	 her	 little	 hands
excitedly	and	jumping	up	and	down.
The	 Brahmin	 turned	 and	 saw	 the	 urchin	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 the	 Princes,	 holding	 the
disputed	mango.	His	own	son	was	a	few	feet	away,	bawling	with	all	his	might,	to
attract	 even	 more	 attention	 since	 he	 discovered	 the	 others	 were	 somehow
interested	in	his	loss.	The	five	Princes	closed	in	on	the	helpless	urchin,	led	by	the
tall	Brahmin.
“Guards!”	the	Brahmin	yelled	at	the	figures	near	the	gate.

The	 two	 bored	 soldiers	 reluctantly	 got	 up	 from	 their	 reclining	 positions	 and
lumbered	towards	the	group.	The	hot	sun	was	now	scorching	every	blade	of	grass
and	the	soldiers	silently	cursed	the	stranger	for	making	them	leave	the	shade.	The
urchin	stood	trembling	with	fear	as	the	Princes	and	the	Brahmin	glowered	at	him.
Bhima	 had	 a	 murderous	 look	 in	 his	 eyes	 and	 was	 still	 smarting	 from	 the
humiliating	fall	he	had	taken.	As	the	wind	had	turned,	Suyodhana	and	his	siblings
could	clearly	hear	the	conversation.
Bhima	 moved	 towards	 the	 urchin,	 but	 the	 Brahmin	 immediately	 said,	 “Do	 not
touch	 him	 and	 pollute	 yourself”.	 Bhima	 looked	 confused	 and	 turned	 towards	 the
Brahmin,	who	asked	the	urchin,	“Which	caste	do	you	belong	to?”
When	 the	 boy	 realized	 the	 Brahmin	 had	 asked	 him	 the	 question,	 he	 lowered	 his
head.	How	was	it,	he	wondered,	that	before	anyone	even	asked	him	his	name,	they
asked	 about	 his	 caste?	 He	 mumbled	 something	 that	 did	 not	 carry	 to	 the	 Kaurava
Princes	in	their	tree.
“What!	A	Nishada	so	close	to	the	main	fort	gate	of	Hastinapura!	An	Untouchable
walking	on	the	royal	highway?	Is	this	how	the	King	runs	his	kingdom?	What	can
one	expect	of	a	blind	man?	It	is	no	wonder	such	transgressions	of	dharma	happen
here.”	The	Brahmin	turned	to	the	eldest	Pandava.	“What	is	the	punishment	meted
out	to	rascals	who	commit	such	violations	in	the	kingdom	of	the	Kurus?”
The	 Pandavas	 appeared	 embarrassed	 and	 did	 not	 know	 what	 to	 say.	 The	 boys
looked	 at	 each	 other.	 “I	 can	 break	 his	 head,”	 volunteered	 Bhima,	 still	 smarting
from	the	fall	he	had	taken	at	the	hands	of	the	Nishada	urchin	half	his	size.
“Quiet!”	 The	 colour	 drained	 from	 Bhima’s	 face.	 Turning	 to	 Yudhishtra	 the
Brahmin	said,	“You	are	going	to	be	the	next	King.	You	say	how	we	should	deal
with	this	rascal.	Let	me	see	what	my	brother-in-law,	Kripa,	has	taught	you.”
Yudhishtra	 tensed,	 trying	 to	 remember	 the	 correct	 answer.	 ‘Kripa’s	 brother-inlaw?	 Was	 this	 Drona?	 So	 this	 was	 the	 famous	 guru	 whose	 arrival	 we	 all
awaited.’
Eyes	 wide	 with	 surprise,	 Suyodhana	 quickly	 slid	 down	 the	 slope	 towards	 the
commotion	 as	 his	 siblings	 followed.	 Something	 Drona	 had	 said	 to	 Yudhishtra
jarred	Suyodhana’s	mind:	‘next	King’.	‘How	 can	 Yudhishtra	 be	 the	next	King	of

Hastinapura?	 I	 am	 the	 eldest	 son	 of	 the	 reigning	 King,	 Dhritarashtra,’	 wondered
the	 young	 Prince.	 ‘Uncle	 Pandu	 ruled	 on	 my	 father’s	 behalf	 because	 of	 his
blindness.	That	does	not	mean	Pandu’s	son	becomes	the	next	ruler	of	Hastinapura
when	 the	 time	 comes.’	 This	 was	 precisely	 the	 kind	 of	 conspiracy	 his	 Uncle
Shakuni	had	warned	him	against.
Seeing	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 siblings	 approach,	 the	 gaunt	 and	 fair	 Brahmin	 boy
looked	 at	 them	 with	 apprehension	 and	 moved	 closer	 to	 his	 mother.	 Suyodhana
looked	 at	 the	 boy’s	 finely	 etched	 face.	 Curly	 hair	 fell	 to	 his	 shoulders	 and	 his
curved	mouth	and	aquiline	nose	spoke	of	innocence	and	inner	beauty.	The	Kaurava
Prince	smiled	at	him	in	passing.
“Aswathama,	 come	 here,”	 called	 the	 Brahmin	 and	 the	 boy	 moved	 towards	 his
father	apprehensively.	“What	punishment	is	proper	for	this	rascal?”
Before	Aswathama	could	answer,	the	dark	boy	took	to	his	heels,	losing	the	mango
on	the	way.	He	nimbly	jumped	over	the	diminutive	Aswathama	and	ran	towards
the	 jungle	 like	 a	 monkey,	 escaping	 his	 captors.	 Aswathama	 ran	 to	 pick	 up	 the
fallen	mango	from	the	sand,	but	before	he	could	touch	it,	his	father	stopped	him.
“Get	that	boy!”
No	 one	 moved.	 Suyodhana	 watched	 the	 dark	 boy	 vanish	 into	 a	 flurry	 of	 waving
foliage,	which	became	still	in	a	moment.	The	guards	took	off	in	reluctant	pursuit	of
the	Nishada	who	had	polluted	the	royal	highway	and	dared	to	steal	from	the	royal
grounds.	 Suyodhana	 knew	 the	 guards	 did	 not	 usually	 take	 such	 minor
transgressions	 seriously	 as	 the	 poor	 always	 flocked	 to	 the	 palace	 gates	 and
foraged	for	leftovers.	Except	when	royalty	was	present	on	the	highway,	the	caste
rules	were	not	strictly	applied.	It	was	too	hot	to	pursue	a	small	boy	for	such	a	silly
crime	and	not	worth	the	effort.	The	guards	made	a	great	show	of	searching	for	him
and	prayed	the	Brahmin	would	go	away	and	leave	them	in	peace	to	complete	their
game	 of	 dice.	 However,	 the	 Brahmin	 would	 not	 let	 them	 be.	 He	 stood	 in	 the
blazing	 sun,	 waiting	 for	 the	 incompetent	 guards	 of	 Hastinapura	 to	 capture	 the
culprit.
“What	 a	 surprise,	 brother!”	 The	 booming	 voice	 of	 Kripa,	 the	 Princes’	 teacher,
broke	the	spell.	Immediately,	all	the	Princes	bowed	to	their	Master.	Kripa	turned
towards	 them	 saying,	 “Have	 you	 nothing	 better	 to	 do	 than	 play	 in	 the	 hot	 sun?
Have	you	finished	the	homework	I	gave	you	yesterday?”

“Yes	 Guruji,”	 cried	 Arjuna,	 while	 Suyodhana	 cursed	 himself	 silently	 for	 having
forgotten.
“You	 boys	 go	 and	 revise	 yesterday’s	 lessons.	 I	 will	 take	 my	 brother-in-law	 to
Bhishma.	So,	how	was	the	journey?	Hey!	Aswathama,	you	have	grown.	You	are
almost	 as	 tall	 as	 me	 now.”	 Kripa	 tried	 to	 catch	 the	 small	 boy	 who	 was	 hiding
behind	his	mother.
“Kripa,	don’t	touch	him!	He	touched	a	Nishada	boy,”	said	Drona.
“What?	All	that	is	nonsense,	Drona.”	Kripa	grabbed	the	squealing	Aswathama	by
his	waist	and	threw	him	up	into	the	air.
Kripi,	 the	 boy’s	 mother,	 stood	 beaming,	 thankful	 that	 her	 brother	 had	 broken	 the
tense	 scene.	 Her	 husband	 was	 still	 watching	 the	 guards	 but	 Kripa	 had	 started
walking	 towards	 the	 palace	 with	 little	 Aswathama	 perched	 on	 his	 broad
shoulders.	 The	 Pandava	 Princes	 and	 Kripi	 followed	 in	 his	 wake.	 Reluctantly,
Drona	turned,	making	a	mental	note	of	the	loose	way	in	which	things	were	run	in
the	largest	empire	of	India.	He	would	have	a	word	with	the	Regent	of	the	Kurus
about	 such	 blatant	 violations	 of	 the	 caste	 rules.	 ‘No	 wonder	 the	 rain	 gods	 are
angry	 and	 have	 refused	 to	 shower	 their	 blessing	 on	 this	 land	 for	 the	 last	 two
years,’	he	thought.
As	the	group	vanished	behind	the	safety	of	the	fort	gates,	the	little	boy	perched	on
the	 broad	 shoulders	 of	 Guru	 Kripa,	 turned	 back	 to	 look	 at	 Suyodhana	 and	 his
siblings,	 who	 were	 counting	 their	 haul	 of	 mangoes.	 He	 smiled	 at	 them	 and
Suyodhana	 grinned	 back.	 Neither	 had	 any	 inkling	 of	 what	 life	 had	 in	 store	 for
them.
***

The	Nishada	boy,	who	had	vanished	 into	the	bushes	earlier,	now	darted	back	to
pick	up	the	discarded	and	forgotten	mango.	Sushasana	grabbed	him	by	his	narrow
waist	but	let	go	when	Suyodhana	came	forward.	‘Does	he	expect	me	to	fall	at	his
feet?’	the	Nishada	boy	wondered	when	he	saw	Suyodhana.	He	struggled	to	hold
back	his	tears,	trying	to	garner	as	much	dignity	as	possible	in	his	tattered	clothes.
Suyodhana	picked	up	the	mango	and	offered	it	to	the	boy.	The	urchin	was	stunned;
then	 he	 extended	 a	 hand	 to	 grab	 the	 precious	 fruit.	 ‘Why	 are	 you	 looking	 so

surprised	Prince?	But	then,	what	do	you	know	about	hunger?’	the	Nishada	thought,
as	 he	 tore	 into	 the	 fruit	 like	 a	 wild	 animal.	 Suyodhana	 pulled	 his	 little	 sister
towards	him	and	took	the	mangoes	she	was	carrying	in	her	skirt.	Ignoring	the	girl’s
protests,	the	Prince	dropped	all	the	fruits	in	front	of	the	Nishada	and	stood	back.
Hunger	had	forced	the	boy	to	enter	the	royal	grounds	to	find	food	for	his	starving
family.	 His	 aunt	 had	 been	 afraid	 the	 guards	 would	 catch	 him.	 Stealing	 was
something	he	had	never	contemplated	in	their	better	days	but	when	poverty	caught
up	 with	 morality,	 the	 lines	 between	 the	 acceptable	 and	 unacceptable	 somehow
vanished.	 He	 knew	 that	 his	 aunt	 would	 be	 watching	 the	 unfolding	 scene,	 hidden
behind	a	bush,	along	with	his	cousins.	They	had	not	eaten	for	two	days.	When	he
had	 told	 her	 of	 his	 plan,	 she	 had	 protested	 just	 a	 little.	 Now	 he	 regretted	 the
impulsive	 thought,	 sure	 the	 Hastinapura	 guards	 would	 drag	 him	 to	 the	 dreaded
prison	cells	near	the	Khandiva	forest.
“The	mangoes	are	for	you,”	the	young	Prince	said.
The	boy	stood	confused	for	a	moment	and	then	grabbed	the	mangoes	with	alacrity,
before	 the	 Prince	 could	 change	 his	 mind.	 His	 hands	 could	 hold	 only	 a	 few	 and
Suyodhana	moved	to	pick	up	the	ones	that	fell	from	the	urchin’s	desperate	grasp.
The	 Nishada	 boy	 held	 the	 mangoes	 close	 to	 his	 chest	 as	 the	 Prince	 piled	 on	 the
fallen	ones.
“Now	go	before	they	see	you,”	Suyodhana	said,	pointing	to	the	guards,	engrossed
in	their	game	of	dice.
The	boy	ran	towards	his	aunt,	who	was	watching	with	baited	breath.	As	the	boy
was	 about	 to	 enter	 the	 jungle,	 Suyodhana	 called	 out	 to	 him.	 The	 boy’s	 heart
lurched.	Was	the	Prince	calling	to	take	back	his	gift?	His	eyes	filled	with	tears	of
anger	and	frustration.
The	 Nishada	 stopped	 in	 his	 tracks.	 When	 he	 turned,	 the	 Prince	 was	 smiling	 and
waving	at	him.	“Hey,	what	is	your	name?”
The	sun	was	blazing	overhead.	The	earth	beneath	his	feet	seemed	to	be	melting	in
the	fierce	heat.	He	took	a	deep	breath	and	shouted	back,	“Ekalavya”.	Wondering	at
his	own	audacity,	he	ran	into	the	safety	of	the	jungle	without	waiting	to	hear	what
the	Prince	was	trying	to	say.

***

As	 the	 class	 dragged	 on	 through	 the	 hot	 afternoon,	 Suyodhana	 sat	 thinking	 of
Ekalavya’s	hungry	and	tired	face;	and	the	poverty	that	had	made	him	dare	trespass
into	the	royal	grounds.	Shutting	out	the	sounds	of	an	enthusiastic	Arjuna	trying	hard
to	impress	his	new	Guru	with	his	command	over	the	scriptures,	Suyodhana’s	mind
remained	on	the	poor	Nishada	boy.	‘Perhaps	I	ought	to	learn	more	about	him	and
his	 people,’	 the	 Prince	 thought	 as	 he	 caught	 the	 eye	 of	 a	 beaming	 Aswathama,
sitting	near	his	father.	The	boys	exchanged	grins	as	their	eyes	communicated	in	the
silent	way	only	boys	of	their	age	can,	about	how	boring	the	class	was.
“Suyodhana,	stop	your	day-dreaming	and	listen!”	The	angry	voice	of	Guru	Drona
broke	the	monotony	of	the	class	and	pulled	the	young	Prince	back	to	the	dry	world
of	scriptures	and	holy	books	and	away	from	life	and	his	dreams.
Arjuna	 and	 Yudhishtra	 were	 competing	 with	 each	 other	 to	 recite	 the	 Vedas.
Suyodhana	tried	to	keep	himself	awake.	Outside,	the	earth	lay	soaked	in	the	red	of
the	setting	sun	and	far	away	from	the	palace,	a	tired,	black	Nishada	woman	and
her	five	boys	slept	contentedly	after	breaking	their	long	fast.	A	few	feet	from	them,
another	little	boy	sat	nibbling	the	mango	seeds	the	Nishadas	had	thrown	away.

3	CHILD	OF	THE	FOREST
EKALAVYA	DID	NOT	KNOW	WHY	 the	Kaurava	Prince	had	behaved	the	way	he	had.	It

had	 been	 a	 reckless	 mission	 to	 get	 into	 the	 royal	 grounds	 to	 steal	 mangoes,	 but
hunger	had	ripped	away	his	fear.	He	had	been	prepared	for	a	lashing	by	the	guards
if	he	was	caught,	what	he	had	not	expected	was	the	strange	behaviour	of	the	young
Prince	 in	 his	 expensive	 silken	 clothes.	 There	 had	 to	 be	 a	 catch	 somewhere.	 No
high-born	 person	 behaved	 that	 way.	 It	 was	 as	 strange	 as	 expecting	 a	 lion	 to	 be
meek	 and	 eat	 grass.	 He	 asked	 his	 aunt	 whether	 the	 mangoes	 were	 poisoned.	 He
had	been	afraid	to	touch	them	since	they	had	been	given	to	him	so	freely	but	his
starved	cousins	grabbed	the	fruit	from	his	hands;	so	he	forgot	all	about	poison	and
princes	 in	 the	 immediate	 need	 to	 fight	 them	 for	 the	 luscious	 fruit.	 His	 aunt
intervened,	 giving	 the	 best	 fruit	 to	 her	 children.	 Ekalavya	 got	 a	 not-so-ripe	 one.
The	favouritism	was	nothing	new	to	him	but	it	still	hurt.	He	was	determined	not	to
cry	over	such	things.	He	was	ten	years	old	now	and	almost	a	man.	Men	did	not	cry
over	silly	things.
From	the	time	Ekalavya	could	remember,	they	have	been	walking	across	India	–
his	aunt,	her	five	sons,	and	he.	It	was	nothing	new	to	people	like	them.	He	had	no
recollection	 of	 ever	 having	 a	 mother	 and	 his	 father	 existed	 only	 in	 the	 fantastic
tales	 his	 aunt	 sometimes	 told	 him.	 His	 mother	 had	 died	 the	 day	 he	 was	 born.
Distressed,	 his	 father	 had	 gone	 away,	 leaving	 little	 Ekalavya	 in	 his	 brother’s
charge.	Sometimes,	she	would	talk	about	his	father,	saying	he	was	a	Prince	or	a
King	somewhere	in	the	East,	and	one	day	he	would	rescue	them	all	from	poverty,
but	 on	 most	 occasions,	 she	 cursed	 him	 for	 having	 abandoned	 his	 son.	 She	 often
reminded	Ekalavya	that	he	was	nothing	better	than	an	orphan.
Ekalavya	had	the	faint	memory	of	a	man	who	would	carry	him	when	he	was	only
as	high	as	his	thigh.	This	man	was	the	uncle	his	father	had	left	him	with.	He	now
lay	 buried	 somewhere	 in	 the	 deep	 jungles	 of	 central	 India.	 He	 had	 been	 caught
stealing	 eggs	 from	 a	 farm	 and	 was	 beaten	 to	 death.	 Whenever	 they	 went	 hungry,
and	that	was	quite	often,	his	aunt	called	out	her	husband’s	name.	She	wailed	that
had	 he	 been	 alive,	 they	 would	 have	 all	 lived	 like	 princes.	 Ekalavya	 was	 old
enough	 to	 know	 that	 was	 not	 true.	 He	 had	 seen	 so	 many	 others	 like	 themselves,

living	 in	 the	 shadows	 of	 a	 great	 civilization,	 meek	 before	 their	 superiors,	 while
ferociously	competitive	and	cruel	to	their	fellow	unfortunates.
Ekalavya	 could	 tolerate	 his	 cousins	 but	 there	 was	 another	 small	 boy	 who	 kept
trailing	 after	 them.	 He	 was	 even	 dirtier	 than	 they	 were	 and	 had	 bad	 teeth	 and
festering	sores	on	his	legs.	His	ribs	stood	clearly	outlined	under	his	stretched	and
cracked	black	skin;	while	his	belly	button	protruded	from	his	bulging	stomach	like
a	mushroom.	The	family	often	chased	him	away	but	he	never	gave	up.	Ekalavya’s
aunt	even	threw	stones	at	the	creature	but	like	a	mangy	dog,	the	dirty	boy	followed
them,	trying	to	pick	up	leftovers	and	begging	for	food.	He	darted	away	from	the
pelted	 stones,	 only	 to	 reappear.	 Sometimes	 his	 aunt	 felt	 pity	 for	 the	 boy	 and
offered	the	urchin	whatever	they	could	spare.	He	grabbed	it	with	both	hands	and
gnawed	like	a	hungry	beast	of	the	forest.	However,	that	was	rare	for	they	hardly
had	enough	to	ease	their	own	hunger.
Nevertheless,	the	boy	kept	trailing	them.	He	had	found	them	in	the	village	where
Ekalavya’s	 uncle	 had	 been	 thrashed	 to	 death.	 Another	 man	 had	 been	 caught
stealing	at	the	same	time	and	he	too,	met	the	same	fate.	Ekalavya’s	aunt	found	the
little	boy	crying	near	the	inert	body	of	his	father.	Despite	her	own	grief,	she	had
felt	pity	for	the	helpless	little	one	and	since	she	was	in	no	mood	to	eat	that	day,
she	had	given	him	her	share	of	food	–	a	mistake	she	regretted	the	moment	she	had
handed	over	the	scraps.	Now,	like	a	curse,	the	boy	followed	them.	Some	days	they
would	 get	 lucky	 when	 some	 merchant	 would	 feed	 the	 poor	 as	 an	 offering	 to	 the
gods	to	keep	him	prosperous.	Ekalavya	noticed	that	at	such	times	his	aunt	became
generous	and	offered	the	boy	something	more	than	mere	leftovers.	She	would	also
talk	 to	 him	 kindly.	 It	 was	 during	 one	 of	 those	 rare	 conversations	 that	 Ekalavya
learnt	his	name	–	Jara.
Now,	 Ekalavya	 turned	 away	 from	 Jara’s	 hungry	 gaze.	 He	 knew	 the	 boy	 was
waiting	for	him	to	finish	his	mango	so	he	could	suck	at	the	seed	Ekalavya	would
throw	away.	Finally,	when	he	was	sure	there	was	nothing	left	Ekalavya	threw	the
seed	away.	He	despised	the	creature	who	stooped	so	low	as	to	eat	the	leftovers	of
a	Nishada	but	he	also	despised	himself	for	being	cruel	to	the	hungry	boy.	The	boy
showed	no	fighting	spirit.	He	was	a	dog.	Ekalavya	spat	on	the	ground	in	disgust.
‘Our	 lives	 are	 like	 those	 mango	 seeds;	 chewed,	 sucked	 clean	 and	 spat	 out,’	 he
thought	bitterly.
Ekalavya	could	hear	the	boy	rummaging	for	the	mango	seed.	He	felt	a	sudden	rush

of	tears	when	he	heard	Jara’s	joyous	yelp.	Like	a	rat,	Jara	sat	and	nibbled	at	the
seed	 that	 had	 already	 been	 picked	 clean.	 Deep	 in	 his	 heart,	 Ekalavya	 wanted	 to
kill	the	Prince	who	had	so	patronizingly	given	him	the	mangoes.	It	pained	him	that
he	 was	 dependent	 on	 the	 generosity	 of	 princes	 and	 merchants.	 He	 looked	 at	 his
own	spidery	limbs.	‘I	am	a	man	now,’	he	thought.	‘I	should	be	able	to	provide	for
my	family.’	He	was	a	Nishada	and	had	any	of	the	older	males	of	his	family	been
alive,	he	would	have	been	taught	the	skills	of	a	hunter;	but	they	had	travelled	far
away	 from	 the	 hills	 of	 Vindhya,	 where	 their	 tribe	 lived.	 Ekalavya	 stared	 at	 the
sleeping	 faces	 of	 his	 aunt	 and	 five	 cousins	 and	 felt	 a	 wave	 of	 pity	 and
helplessness.
Ekalavya	had	hidden	one	plump	mango	in	his	waistcloth,	to	eat	after	his	aunt	and
cousins	went	to	sleep.	It	was	the	best	one	and	he	knew	that	if	his	aunt	had	seen	it,
she	 would	 have	 given	 it	 to	 her	 sons.	 He	 wanted	 to	 eat	 it	 alone.	 Jara’s	 eyes
glistened	 in	 anticipation.	 The	 moon	 had	 risen	 over	 the	 low	 shrub-covered	 hills,
bathing	 the	earth	in	silver.	Ekalavya	looked	at	Jara.	 He	considered	throwing	the
mango	 to	 him	 but	 it	 was	 too	 good	 to	 be	 wasted.	 He	 plunged	 his	 teeth	 into	 the
smooth	 fruit	 and	 sucked.	 Jara	 gulped.	 Disgusted,	 Ekalavya	 threw	 the	 half-eaten
fruit	to	the	waiting	boy,	who	grabbed	it.
As	Ekalavya	stood	up,	he	heard	the	sound	of	hoofs.	Far	away,	among	the	thorny
shrubs,	he	could	see	the	silhouettes	of	mounted	men.	Nagas!	Ekalavya	stood	dumb
with	terror,	rooted	to	the	earth.	The	Nagas	were	the	most	dreaded	of	all	tribes	and
they	were	moving	towards	the	palace	under	cover	of	darkness.	He	could	see	the
horses’	dark	manes	glistening	in	the	moonlight.	His	aunt	stirred	in	her	sleep	and	let
out	 a	 sigh.	 Ekalavya	 could	 see	 a	 tall,	 dark	 figure	 leading	 the	 pack.	 Moonlight
caressed	his	body,	turning	him	into	an	eerie	figure	in	silver.	Jara	was	still	sucking
the	 mango	 noisily	 and	 Ekalavya	 was	 afraid	 the	 Nagas	 would	 hear	 and	 come	 to
investigate.
But	 the	 Nagas	 were	 in	 no	 mood	 to	 stop	 for	 street	 urchins.	 The	 leader	 was
whispering	 to	 his	 followers	 and	 with	 a	 burst	 of	 activity	 they	 shot	 towards	 the
palace.	 Ekalavya	 started	 running	 behind	 them,	 with	 Jara	 close	 behind.	 He	 knew
what	 he	 was	 doing	 was	 sheer	 madness,	 yet	 he	 wanted	 to	 see	 where	 the	 Nagas
were	 going.	 In	 a	 corner	 of	 his	 mind,	 Ekalavya	 wished	 they	 would	 take	 over
Hastinapura	and	treat	the	nobles	inside	with	the	same	contempt	they	had	meted	out
to	Untouchables	like	him,	but	these	were	impossible	dreams.	Hastinapura	was	too
strong	and	a	rag-tag	group	of	Nagas	were	never	going	to	take	over	the	formidable

city.	Yet	their	leader,	Takshaka,	kept	mounting	terror	attacks	on	the	great	cities	of
India.	Takshaka!	Ekalavya	now	recognized	the	young	Naga	leader.	He	was	leading
the	covert	terror	attack	on	Hastinapura.	Ekalavya	felt	thrilled	to	witness	it.	He	ran
with	 all	 the	 speed	 his	 spindly	 legs	 could	 muster	 and	 like	 a	 puppy,	 Jara	 tried	 to
keep	pace	with	him.
The	night	was	so	silent	that	the	pounding	hoofs	sounded	like	the	drumbeats	of	war.
Ekalavya	 thought	 it	 was	 foolish	 of	 the	 Nagas	 to	 make	 so	 much	 noise	 while
attacking	one	of	the	most	powerful	capitals	of	the	world.	The	Hastinapura	guards
would	 chew	 up	 these	 twenty-four	 men	 in	 minutes.	 Even	 a	 boy	 of	 ten	 could
understand	 the	 folly	 of	 their	 plan.	 Were	 they	 that	 stupid?	 Ekalavya	 wanted
Takshaka	to	win	at	any	cost.	Many	innocents	in	the	fort	would	die	today.	No,	they
were	not	innocent.	They	were	not	people	like	him.	They	were	inhuman	and	treated
people	 like	 him	 with	 contempt,	 or	 pity	 at	 best.	 Ten	 years	 as	 an	 Untouchable
Nishada	 had	 taught	 him	 more	 about	 life	 and	 human	 nature	 than	 what	 many	 older
men	learnt	who	were	fortunate	enough	to	be	born	into	the	right	caste.
Ekalavya	 could	 understand	 the	 hatred	 and	 contempt	 of	 the	 nobles.	 He	 bore	 the
same	hatred	towards	them.	He	had	the	same	contempt	for	creatures	like	Jara,	who
belonged	to	the	even	more	despised	lower	castes	below	the	Nishadas.	Perhaps,	if
the	 Nagas	 took	 over,	 things	 would	 be	 different	 –	 or	 perhaps	 not.	 Yet	 there	 was
satisfaction	in	seeing	the	high	and	mighty	fall.	‘Oh	Shiva!’	prayed	Ekalavya.	‘Let
Takshaka	win	today.’	But	the	face	of	Prince	Suyodhana	haunted	him.	Why	had	the
Prince	shown	him	kindness?	The	high-born	were	not	expected	to	be	kind.	It	was
all	 so	 confusing.	 ‘Perhaps	 the	 Prince	 wanted	 me	 to	 do	 something	 for	 him;	 such
high	ones	are	never	kind	to	us,’	he	thought.	But	what	could	a	Prince	of	Hastinapura
want	from	an	Untouchable	Nishada	boy?	‘Let	them	all	burn	in	the	fire.	They	are	all
the	same.	If	Takshaka	wins	today,	we	can	watch	the	palace	burn	and	crumble.’
Lost	in	his	 thoughts,	 Ekalavya	had	not	noticed	Takshaka	and	 four	other	warriors
move	away	from	the	main	body	of	the	attackers.	The	main	force	clashed	with	the
soldiers	 guarding	 the	 front	 gate.	 The	 bells	 of	 the	 fort	 began	 tolling	 in	 alarm.
Amidst	 the	 clangour	 of	 bells,	 neighing	 of	 horses,	 and	 clashing	 of	 swords,
Takshaka	and	his	men	moved	through	the	shadows	below	the	fort	wall.	Ekalavya
watched	 as	 hundreds	 of	 Kuru	 soldiers	 clambered	 down	 rope	 ladders	 from	 the
towering	 fort	 walls	 and	 engaged	 the	 Nagas	 in	 combat.	 The	 twenty	 Nagas	 were
hopelessly	outnumbered	as	they	fought	the	Hastinapura	soldiers.

It	was	only	when	Jara	tugged	at	his	hand	and	pointed	to	the	left	of	the	fort	gate	that
Ekalavya	 saw	 it.	 There	 was	 a	 rope	 ladder	 hanging	 down	 and	 Takshaka	 and	 his
four	soldiers	were	climbing	up	the	fort	wall	rapidly.	As	they	reached	the	top,	the
moon,	 which	 had	 gone	 into	 hiding	 behind	 the	 clouds,	 suddenly	 emerged	 and
Ekalavya	caught	sight	of	a	dark	figure	on	top	of	the	wall.	This	person	was	helping
the	Naga	leader	enter	the	fort.	Ekalavya	felt	a	deep	thrill.	Takshaka	was	taking	on
the	 might	 of	 Hastinapura	 head	 on.	 He	 felt	 a	 desperate	 need	 to	 see	 his	 hero	 in
action.	Somehow,	he	had	to	get	in	and	see	what	was	happening.	Jara	tried	to	stop
him	 but	 Ekalavya	 pushed	 the	 little	 boy	 away	 and	 ran	 on.	 Jara	 hesitated	 for	 a
moment	and	then	shrugged	and	followed	suit.
***

Ekalavya	quickly	climbed	up	the	rope	ladder.	A	few	hundred	feet	to	the	right,	the
battle	raged	on.	Jara	tried	hard	to	keep	pace	with	the	agile	boy.	Ekalavya	could
see	the	four	Nagas	and	their	informant,	running	towards	the	palace,	keeping	to	the
shadows.	 Hearing	 something	 behind	 him,	 Ekalavya	 turned	 to	 see	 Jara	 trying	 to
climb	the	last	few	rungs	of	the	ladder,	which	were	too	high	for	him.	Cursing,	he
bent	down	and	hauled	Jara	up.
“Why	did	you	come?”	Ekalavya	hissed	at	the	little	boy	but	received	only	a	foolish
grin	in	answer.	Cursing	again,	he	ran	along	the	wall,	but	the	Nagas	had	vanished.
Where	 had	 they	 gone?	 Who	 was	 the	 traitor	 who	 had	 helped	 them	 get	 in?	 It	 was
becoming	 quieter	 outside.	 Had	 the	 battle	 ended?	 As	 usual,	 the	 sheer	 numbers	 of
Hastinapura	 would	 have	 crushed	 the	 valour	 of	 the	 Nagas.	 They	 knew	 it	 was	 a
suicidal	 mission	 yet	 they	 had	 been	 willing	 to	 lay	 down	 their	 lives	 to	 create	 a
diversion	to	allow	their	leader	to	get	into	the	fort.	Ekalavya’s	admiration	for	the
dreaded	Nagas	increased	as	he	thought	of	the	one-sided	battle.	But	where	had	the
Naga	 leader	 vanished?	 ‘If	 only	 this	 idiot	 Jara	 had	 not	 delayed	 me,	 I	 could	 have
kept	up	with	them.	I	will	take	care	of	the	fool	later,’	he	promised	himself.
Suddenly,	 he	 saw	 them	 again.	 They	 had	 left	 the	 safety	 of	 the	 shadows	 and	 were
running	towards	the	palace.	The	guards	were	lighting	more	and	more	torches,	but
the	side	from	which	the	Nagas	were	approaching,	was	still	in	shadow.	They	had
almost	made	it	when	a	boy	in	his	early	teens	stopped	them.	Takshaka	tried	to	fight
his	 way	 past	 him	 but	 the	 boy	 held	 the	 Naga	 leader	 back;	 ducking	 the	 slashing
sword	 while	 trying	 to	 thrust	 his	 own	 into	 the	 Naga’s	 gleaming	 body.	 A	 door
opened	on	the	first	floor	of	the	fort	and	an	older	man	ran	towards	the	commotion,

shouting	 at	 the	 brave	 teenager	 to	 turn	 back.	 Ekalavya	 stood	 fascinated,	 watching
the	unfolding	drama.	One	of	the	Nagas	kicked	the	man	as	he	neared	and	he	fell	like
a	log.	The	teenager	held	on,	despite	the	cuts	he	had	received.	Meanwhile,	the	man
who	 had	 helped	 the	 Nagas	 enter	 the	 fort	 crept	 away	 into	 the	 darkness.	 No	 one
other	 than	 Ekalavya	 and	 Jara	 saw	 him	 vanish	 from	 the	 scene	 as	 soldiers	 came
running	in	from	all	sides.
A	tall	muscular	figure	pushed	the	teenager	away	and	engaged	the	Naga	leader	in
fierce	 combat.	 Ekalavya	 recognized	 the	 Brahmin	 Guru	 who	 had	 caught	 him	 that
morning.	 He	 prayed	 for	 Takshaka	 to	 win.	 Arrows	 flew	 thick	 and	 fast.	 They	 had
already	claimed	two	of	the	Naga	warriors	but	as	the	soldiers	recognized	the	Guru,
they	 stopped	 shooting,	 lest	 one	 of	 them	 pierce	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 Brahmin	 warrior.
Takshaka	 and	 the	 other	 surviving	 Nagas	 struggled	 in	 desperate	 combat	 with	 the
Guru.	 A	 few	 Kuru	 soldiers	 rushed	 to	 help	 him	 but	 he	 waved	 them	 away
contemptuously.	 He	 was	 more	 than	 enough	 for	 these	 barbarians.	 With	 amazing
swordsmanship	 and	 agility,	 Drona	 held	 off	 three	 Naga	 warriors,	 including
Takshaka.	 His	 sword	 found	 its	 mark	 more	 than	 once	 and	 Takshaka	 was	 soon
fighting	with	his	back	to	the	wall.
Ekalavya	saw	the	tall	figure	of	Bhishma,	Grand	Regent	of	the	Kurus,	appear	on	a
balcony	 of	 the	 palace.	 He	 was	 barking	 orders	 and	 Ekalavya	 could	 see	 soldiers
running	in	from	all	sides	with	their	swords	drawn.	Hearing	the	commotion,	Drona
looked	 back	 and	 shouted	 that	 he	 did	 not	 need	 any	 help.	 That	 was	 enough	 for
Takshaka.	In	the	split	second	Drona’s	attention	wavered,	Takshaka	ran	towards	the
hanging	rope	and	swung	himself	over	the	fort	wall.	Drona	roared	in	rage	and	tried
to	get	hold	of	the	fleeing	Naga	leader	but	the	two	 surviving	Naga	warriors	held
him	 back	 for	 a	 few	 precious	 minutes.	 Drona	 cut	 off	 their	 heads	 without	 even
breaking	 stride	 and	 almost	 caught	 Takshaka.	 His	 sword	 missed	 Takshaka’s	 right
foot	by	inches.	The	Guru	grunted	in	frustration.	Guards	shot	arrows	at	the	fleeing
Naga	 leader	 as	 he	 ran	 along	 the	 fort	 wall,	 desperately	 trying	 to	 find	 his	 waiting
horse.	A	couple	of	arrows	found	their	mark	and	Ekalavya	saw	Takshaka	trying	to
pull	them	out	from	his	thigh	and	shoulder	without	breaking	his	run.	Drona	too,	ran
along	the	fort	wall,	gracefully	leaping	over	the	bodies	of	the	fallen	while	chasing
the	fleeing	Naga.
Ekalavya	 wanted	 to	 see	 Takshaka	 escape	 but	 with	 growing	 admiration,	 he
watched	Drona’s	amazing	prowess.	How	could	a	man	fight	that	well?	What	grace
and	nimbleness!	What	power	and	 technique!	‘I	want	to	 fight	like	that,’	Ekalavya

thought	passionately,	just	as	he	heard	a	scream.	A	lead-tipped	arrow	had	pierced
the	 Guru’s	 left	 foot	 and	 he	 had	 tumbled	 off	 the	 wall	 landing	 below	 with	 a
sickening	thud.	Guards	ran	towards	the	prone	figure.	Takshaka	ran	on.	He	gave	a
low	 whistle	 and	 Ekalavya	 heard	 a	 horse	 neighing	 and	 galloping	 towards	 his
master.
“Get	him,	get	him...”	Drona	tried	to	stand.	In	one	hand,	he	held	the	arrow	he	had
pulled	from	his	leg	and	the	wet,	bloody	tip	glinted	in	the	moonlight.
As	 the	 guards	 rushed	 towards	 Takshaka,	 he	 disappeared	 around	 a	 corner	 of	 the
wall.	“Chase	him...	he	is	getting	away	you	fools,”	shouted	Drona.
The	fort	gates	opened	below	and	scores	of	mounted	soldiers	rushed	out,	galloping
in	hot	pursuit	of	the	Naga	leader.
Drona	 limped	 back	 into	 the	 fort,	 disgusted	 at	 the	 way	 things	 had	 turned	 out.
Bhishma	 stood	 with	 his	 hands	 behind	 his	 back,	 his	 face	 impassive.	 The	 breeze
ruffled	his	long	salt	and	pepper	beard.	The	hint	of	a	frown	appeared	on	his	broad
forehead.	An	uncomfortable	Vidhura	stood	beside	him.	When	Drona	saw	the	tall
figure	 of	 Bhishma,	 he	 was	 taken	 aback	 for	 a	 moment.	 He	 looked	 around	 at	 the
lifeless	bodies	of	the	palace	guards	and	then	at	the	Grand	Regent’s	proud	face.
“The	soldiers	here	are	incompetent,	my	Lord.	The	Naga	leader	got	away	because
they	do	not	have	professional	training.	They	shot	me	instead	of	that	rascal.”	There
was	a	tone	of	accusation	in	Drona’s	voice	but	Vidhura	understood	the	Guru	was
trying	to	defend	himself	for	the	terrorist	leader’s	escape.
Bhishma	 looked	 the	 Guru	 squarely	 in	 the	 face.	 Drona	 looked	 away.	 Finally,	 the
Grand	 Regent	 spoke.	 “It	 will	 be	 more	 prudent	 for	 you	 to	 stick	 to	 training	 the
Princes.	 Leave	 the	 security	 of	 the	 palace	 to	 the	 professionals.	 I	 admire	 your
swordsmanship	but	not	your	eagerness	to	prove	your	heroism.	Vidhura,	show	the
Guru	to	his	chambers.	He	needs	to	rest.”
Drona’s	fair	face	reddened	in	anger	and	embarrassment.	Vidhura	avoided	his	eyes.
Drona	burned	with	humiliation.	His	employer	had	insulted	him	and	the	fact	that	he
had	done	so	in	front	of	a	Shudra,	made	it	almost	unbearable.	He	longed	to	retort
but	feared	the	consequences.	He	needed	the	job.	Until	this	employment,	he	had	led
a	 tough	 life.	 The	 thought	 of	 roaming	 from	 village	 to	 village,	 from	 kingdom	 to

kingdom,	in	search	of	another	job,	made	him	shudder.	He	had	gone	through	all	that
misery.	 Poverty	 had	 been	 his	 constant	 companion	 from	 as	 early	 as	 he	 could
remember.	He	had	a	family	to	feed.	The	warrior	in	him	wanted	to	challenge	the
arrogant	Bhishma	to	a	duel.	Perhaps	the	veteran	warrior	would	defeat	him.	After
all,	 the	 Grand	 Sire	 inspired	 fear	 and	 awe	 in	 his	 opponents.	 It	 was	 even	 thought
honourable	to	die	at	his	hands.	Drona	had	dreamt	of	such	a	death	in	his	youth.	It
was	 how	 warriors	 wished	 to	 die,	 with	 honour	 intact	 and	 head	 held	 high.	 Then
Aswathama’s	innocent	face	rose	up	in	his	mind’s	eye.	His	son	deserved	a	better
life	than	he	had.	‘For	his	sake	I	must	swallow	my	pride.	That	is	the	fate	of	every
father.’
He	 turned	 to	 Vidhura	 saying,	 “I	 need	 no	 escort.”	 Drona	 hurried	 past	 him	 to	 his
chamber.
Vidhura	stood	back,	understanding	Drona’s	pain	and	so	refusing	to	respond	to	the
Guru’s	 insult.	 Vidhura	 gazed	 at	 the	 vanishing	 form	 of	 the	 Guru,	 his	 shoulders
stooped.	Bhishma	could	be	scathing	at	times.
“Report	 to	 me	 once	 they	 catch	 Takshaka,	 though	 I	 think	 it	 is	 most	 unlikely.”
Bhishma	sighed	and	walked	away.
It	 was	 then	 that	 Vidhura	 saw	 a	 young	 boy	 tugging	 at	 an	 unconscious	 man.	 He
walked	over	to	him	and	asked,	“Is	he	hurt?”
The	 boy	 looked	 up	 at	 the	 well-dressed	 person	 in	 surprise.	 “I	 do	 not	 know,
Swami.”
“You	are	the	fearless	one	who	tried	to	stop	Takshaka,	are	you	not?	What	is	your
name,	son?”	Vidhura	asked.
“I	am	Vasusena,	Swami,	and	this	is	my	father,	Athiratha,	the	charioteer.	I	am	also
known	as	Karna.	Swami,	please	help	me	to	carry	my	father	to	our	hut.	My	mother
will	be	worried.”
Without	a	word,	Vidhura	lifted	the	prone	man’s	shoulders	while	Karna	tried	to	lift
his	legs	but	the	man	was	too	heavy	for	the	boy.
“I	 think	 we	 should	 help,”	 Jara	 said	 to	 Ekalavya	 from	 where	 they	 stood	 in	 the
shadows.	Before	he	could	be	stopped,	Jara	ran	out.

Ekalavya	 cursed	 the	 idiot.	 ‘Ruined!	 Now	 we	 will	 be	 caught	 and	 thrashed.	 That
fool	 Jara!’	 he	 muttered	 viciously.	 There	 was	 no	 choice.	 He	 had	 to	 pull	 back	 the
idiot	and	run	before	somebody	found	them.	He	chased	after	Jara,	trying	to	catch
the	little	boy	by	his	hair.	The	sound	attracted	the	guards	and	they	raised	the	alarm.
Hearing	 the	 noise,	 Karna	 and	 Vidhura	 looked	 up	 and	 saw	 two	 Nishada	 boys
running	 towards	 them.	 Before	 they	 could	 recover	 from	 their	 surprise,	 Jara	 had
reached	the	prone	man	and	started	to	lift	him.	Ekalavya	stopped	a	few	feet	away,
panting.
“Swami,	we	came	to	help,”	said	Jara,	looking	at	Vidhura	with	his	wide	eyes.
The	Prime	Minister	of	the	Kurus	burst	out	laughing	seeing	Jara’s	frail	form.	The
soldiers	 had	 closed	 in	 and	 caught	 hold	 of	 the	 struggling	 Ekalavya,	 but	 Vidhura
raised	his	hand.	“Leave	him…	these	are	my	nephews	from	the	village.”
Ekalavya	 was	 even	 more	 surprised	 than	 the	 soldiers,	 who	 reluctantly	 released
their	grip	on	his	shoulders.	They	bowed	and	departed.	Without	a	word,	Ekalavya
joined	them	in	carrying	the	unconscious	man	to	his	hut,	located	at	the	lowest	level
of	the	fort,	near	the	stables.
A	woman	stood	at	the	entrance.	“My	mother,	Radha,”	said	Karna.
They	gently	laid	the	man	on	the	lone	cane	cot	in	the	sparsely	furnished	hut.	Vidhura
asked	the	woman	for	some	water,	a	few	Tulsi	leaves,	and	some	kitchen	herbs.	Jara
and	 Ekalavya	 stood	 in	 a	 corner,	 afraid	 to	 move,	 unsure	 how	 the	 Minister	 would
react.	Ekalavya	was	confused	about	why	he	had	saved	them	from	the	soldiers.	His
eyes	 roamed	 about	 the	 small	 but	 tidy	 hut.	 These	 people	 lived	 in	 poverty,	 yet	 he
was	jealous	of	them.	They	were	lucky;	they	had	a	roof	over	their	heads.	The	faces
of	 his	 aunt	 and	 cousins	 sleeping	 in	 the	 open	 came	 to	 mind	 and	 he	 felt	 bitterness
well	up	in	his	heart.
The	woman	fussed	around	her	husband	while	the	Minister	administered	his	brew
to	 the	 dry	 lips	 of	 the	 injured	 man.	 After	 a	 while,	 he	 stirred	 and	 woke.	 His	 wife
smiled	 through	 her	 tears	 and	 Vidhura	 stood	 up	 to	 leave.	 Radha	 protested	 saying
they	could	not	leave	without	eating	something.	She	thanked	Vidhura	profusely	for
saving	her	husband’s	life.	The	Prime	Minister	explained	it	had	been	a	minor	injury
and	there	was	no	threat	to	her	husband’s	life.	The	charioteer	too,	joined	his	wife

in	 pleading	 with	 the	 Minister	 to	 eat	 something	 in	 their	 humble	 home.	 Finally,
Vidhura	 consented.	 He	 could	 not	 deny	 them	 this	 small	 pleasure	 without	 hurting
them.	He	looked	at	the	man	and	said	with	admiration,	“Your	son	is	courageous.	If
he	was	to	be	trained	in	arms,	he	would	be	an	asset	to	Hastinapura.”
“Swami,	we	are	poor	Sutas.	Who	will	instruct	our	son?	I	am	teaching	him	my	own
profession	 and	 shall	 make	 him	 the	 best	 charioteer	 in	 the	 country.	 But	 learning
archery	is	beyond	our	caste	status	and	means.”
Ekalavya	saw	the	Suta	boy	keep	his	eye	fixed	to	the	ground,	not	wanting	anyone	to
see	his	shame.	‘If	he	can	be	a	warrior,	I	can	be	one	too,’	he	thought	fiercely.	He
turned	 to	 see	 Jara	 looking	 at	 the	 boiling	 pot,	 his	 eyes	 pleading	 for	 something	 to
eat.
Vidhura	remained	silent	for	a	long	time.	“Hmm…	let	me	see,	Athiratha.	I	do	not
know	whether	it	will	work	but	I	will	try.	The	Acharya	is	a	good	man	and	a	great
teacher.	 Your	 boy	 has	 done	 a	 great	 service	 to	 the	 country	 tonight	 by	 stopping
Takshaka’s	 attack.	 I	 will	 request	 him	 to	 accept	 your	 boy	 as	 his	 pupil.	 But	 he	 is
conservative	and	may	object	to	teaching	a...	I	will	ask	his	Excellency	Bhishma	to
put	in	a	word.	Maybe...	let	me	see...”
There	 was	 doubt	 in	 Vidhura’s	 voice	 but	 Athiratha	 was	 ecstatic.	 This	 was	 the
Prime	Minister	of	the	country	speaking	and	the	charioteer	had	every	reason	to	be
happy.	His	son’s	future	would	now	be	secure.
Ekalavya	was	burning	with	jealousy.	How	easy	things	were	for	some	people.	He
wanted	to	ask	the	Prime	Minister	whether	he	would	consider	his	case	as	well	but
the	gap	in	social	status	between	him	and	Karna	was	so	great	that	he	did	not	dare.
He	bit	his	lip	and	stood	burning	with	envy,	angry	at	the	fates,	which	had	ordained
his	birth	in	the	lowest	of	castes.
‘Who	needs	a	Guru?	The	world	is	my	Guru,’	thought	Ekalavya.	‘I	can	be	a	better
archer	 than	 that	 lucky	 bastard.’	 He	 wanted	 to	 run	 away	 from	 the	 sickening
happiness	pervading	the	humble	hut.	Jara	tugged	at	his	fingers.	Irritated,	Ekalavya
snapped	at	him	to	remain	quiet.	Jara	made	the	universal	gesture	of	hunger.	It	was
the	only	thought	he	ever	had.	At	any	moment,	the	Prime	Minister	could	change	his
mind	and	then	there	would	be	hell	to	pay.	The	kindness	Ekalavya	had	experienced
from	Prince	Suyodhana	and	this	important	man	was	unsettling.	He	remained	tense

and	silent.
Radha	 had	 seen	 Jara’s	 hungry	 look.	 She	 put	 three	 plantain	 leaves	 on	 the	 clean
floor	and	invited	her	guests	to	sit	down	and	eat.	Vidhura	declined,	saying	it	was
not	his	habit	to	eat	so	early	and	that	he	had	not	performed	his	morning	ablutions
yet.	Ekalavya	wanted	to	eat	everything	Radha	served.	He	was	as	hungry	as	a	dog.
Except	for	the	mango,	he	had	not	eaten	anything,	but	he	did	not	want	to	show	these
strangers	 that	 he	 was	 hungry.	 So	 he	 ate	 slowly,	 refusing	 a	 second	 helping.	 Jara
stuffed	 himself	 with	 whatever	 Radha	 offered	 and	 stood	 up	 reluctantly	 when	 he
found	 there	 was	 no	 more	 food	 coming	 his	 way.	 He	 licked	 his	 fingers,	 savouring
the	last	lingering	taste.	Ekalavya	felt	disgusted	by	the	mess	Jara	had	left.	As	they
washed	their	hands	in	the	backyard,	Ekalavya	saw	Jara	beaming	with	satisfaction.
Before	he	could	lash	out	at	his	smugness,	Vidhura	called	them	in	to	bid	farewell	to
Athiratha	and	his	family.
***

“Who	are	you	and	how	did	you	enter	the	fort?”	There	was	no	smile	on	Vidhura’s
face	now.
Ekalavya	 shuddered.	 Finally,	 the	 man	 was	 showing	 his	 true	 colours.	 He	 felt
strangely	comforted	that	the	expected	pattern	of	behaviour	from	a	social	superior
had	reasserted	itself.	“We	are	Nishadas;	we	were	sheltering	in	the	jungle	nearby.
We	 saw	 Takshaka	 and	 his	 gang	 riding	 towards	 the	 fort.”	 The	 moment	 he	 said	 it,
Ekalavya	knew	he	had	made	a	terrible	mistake.
“How	do	you	know	his	name	is	Takshaka?”	The	Prime	Minister’s	immobile	face
appeared	to	be	carved	in	stone.
“Oh,	everybody	in	the	forest	knows,”	Jara	told	him.	“He	comes	to	the	forest	and
gives	us	food	sometimes.	He	said	he	is	going	to	kill	all	of	you	one	day	and	then
this	 palace	 will	 be	 for	 Nishadas	 and	 other	 forest	 dwellers	 like	 the	 Nagas	 and
Kiratas.”
Ekalavya	shuddered	at	Jara’s	casual	words,	sure	this	was	the	end	of	their	lives.
Vidhura	remained	silent	for	a	while	as	Ekalavya’s	legs	started	trembling.
Finally	Vidhura	spoke.	“If	you	keep	watch	on	what	Takshaka	is	doing	and	report
back	to	me,	you	will	be	rewarded.”

“Will	we	get	food?”	Jara	asked,	his	eyes	gleaming.
“You	 will	 get	 food	 and	 more.	 For	 now,	 keep	 this.”	 Vidhura	 threw	 two	 copper
coins	at	them.
“What	are	these?”	Jara	asked,	never	having	seen	or	used	money.
“Ask	your	brother.	He	will	tell	you	how	to	exchange	them	for	food.	There	will	be
more	if	you	report	to	me	about	Takshaka.”
Ekalavya	averted	his	gaze	as	Vidhura’s	dark	eyes	bored	into	him.	He	wished	Jara
would	keep	his	mouth	shut	but	that	did	not	happen.
“We	saw	a	man	like	you...	in	fine	dress…	he	threw	down	a	rope	for	Takshaka	to
enter	the	palace…”	Jara	stopped	when	he	saw	Ekalavya	glaring	at	him.
“Who?	Who	was	it?	Tell	me!”	Vidhura’s	eyes	flashed	with	anger.
“We	do	not	know	his	name,	Swami.	But	if	we	saw	him	again,	we	could	identify
him,”	 Ekalavya	 quickly	 added	 before	 Jara	 could	 say	 something	 that	 would	 land
them	 in	 trouble.	 He	 tried	 to	 keep	 calm	 and	 wondered	 when	 this	 man	 would	 let
them	go.
“Hmm…	you	may	go	now,”	said	Vidhura	quietly.
Ekalavya	grabbed	Jara’s	hand	and	walked	towards	the	palace	gates.	He	could	feel
Vidhura’s	 eyes	 on	 his	 back.	 The	 guards	 stopped	 them	 to	 ask	 whether	 they	 were
really	the	Prime	Minister’s	relatives.	Before	Ekalavya	could	open	his	mouth,	Jara
denied	 it.	 Once	 the	 guards	 were	 sure	 they	 were	 out	 of	 Vidhura’s	 sight,	 they
searched	the	boys	and	found	the	copper	coin	in	Jara’s	fist,	and	took	it.	When	Jara
protested	saying	the	Swami	had	given	it	to	him,	they	thrashed	him.	Ekalavya	did
not	wait	for	a	beating.	He	threw	the	other	coin	down	in	contempt	at	their	feet	and
got	some	satisfaction	in	seeing	the	guard	bending	low,	almost	touching	his	feet,	to
get	at	it.	The	other	guard	saw	the	derisive	smile	and	slapped	Ekalavya	across	the
face.
***

Vidhura	 was	 a	 worried	 man.	 He	 could	 arrange	 an	 identity	 parade	 and	 have	 the

boys	 point	 out	 the	 traitor	 but	 that	 would	 alert	 the	 spy	 that	 his	 cover	 had	 been
blown.	If	it	were	someone	important,	it	would	be	hard	to	nail	him	on	the	testimony
of	 two	 Nishada	 boys.	 It	 was	 better	 to	 wait.	 He	 had	 to	 find	 the	 traitor	 before	 he
could	 do	 any	 more	 damage.	 As	 he	 turned,	 Vidhura	 saw	 the	 profile	 of	 a	 tall	 man
standing	 on	 one	 of	 the	 balconies	 of	 the	 first	 floor	 of	 the	 palace.	 He	 was	 facing
West,	his	head	bowed	as	if	in	prayer.	In	a	land	where	everyone	worshipped	facing
the	rising	sun	in	the	East,	it	seemed	strange	that	someone	was	praying	facing	West.
Vidhura	waited	to	see	who	it	was.	The	man	took	a	long	time	but	when	he	turned,
the	rays	of	the	morning	sun	fell	on	his	face.	Vidhura	shuddered;	it	was	Shakuni,	the
Prince	of	Gandhara.	Their	eyes	met	and	Vidhura	could	feel	the	malevolent	energy
of	those	black	eyes	even	from	a	distance.	‘I	think	I	have	found	the	man,’	thought
Vidhura.	But	there	was	no	proof.	He	would	have	to	wait.
***

In	 the	 balcony	 above,	 Prince	 Shakuni	 reiterated	 the	 promise	 he	 had	 made	 to
himself	when	he	was	barely	five	years	old	and	Lord	Bhishma	had	laid	claim	to	his
ancient	 land,	 Gandhara,	 and	 crushed	 it;	 and	 then	 carried	 off	 his	 sister	 like	 some
common	 chattel,	 to	 be	 married	 off	 to	 a	 blind	 fool	 who	 was	 but	 a	 puppet	 king.
Shakuni	looked	longingly	towards	the	west,	where	his	beloved	country	lay.	Like
every	 other	 day,	 he	 bowed	 his	 head	 and	 reiterated	 his	 vow	 to	 destroy	 India.
Yesterday’s	operation	had	failed	but	he	would	try	again.	Despite	her	crooked	and
confusing	caste	system,	India	had	her	strengths.	It	was	difficult	for	an	outsider	to
conquer	 and	 destroy	 her.	 This	 task	 had	 to	 be	 carried	 out	 by	 the	 people	 of	 the
country	 itself.	 Takshaka	 was	 only	 one	 piece	 in	 this	 game	 of	 dice.	 There	 were
others	he	was	in	the	process	of	meticulously	placing.	The	most	important	one	was
inside	 the	 palace.	 Shakuni	 smiled	 to	 himself	 as	 he	 moved	 towards	 Prince
Suyodhana’s	chamber.	It	was	time	for	class.

4	THE	CHARIOTER’S	SON
KARNA	HAD	ONCE	EXPRESSED	HIS	SECRET	DESIRE	to	become	an	archer,	to	his	parents.

His	 father	 had	 been	 silent	 for	 many	 days	 after.	 His	 mother	 had	 broached	 the
subject	to	his	father	several	times	in	the	next	few	weeks	but	this	had	elicited	only
grunts	in	reply.	Karna	had	waited,	his	heart	thumping	in	his	chest,	praying	to	Lord
Shiva	 that	 his	 father	 would	 consent.	 Then	 one	 day,	 Athiratha	 asked	 him	 to
accompany	him	to	the	temple.	They	were	not	permitted	to	enter	the	inner	sanctum
of	 the	 temple	 as	 they	 belonged	 to	 one	 of	 the	 lower	 castes,	 but	 were	 fortunate
enough	to	be	allowed	access	to	the	outer	compound	to	pray.	Acharya	Kripa	was
sitting	on	an	elevated	platform	under	a	huge	Banyan	tree,	arguing	with	his	friends.
A	game	of	dice	was	in	full	flow	and	the	Acharya	was	on	the	verge	of	beating	one
of	his	friends	when	father	and	son	approached	him.
Athiratha	 had	 taken	 off	 his	 angavastra	from	 his	 shoulder	 and	 tied	 it	 around	 his
waist	as	a	mark	of	respect.	He	stood	a	few	feet	from	the	Acharya,	his	eyes	fixed	to
the	ground	in	the	deferential	manner	of	a	Suta	who	wished	to	speak	to	a	Brahmin.
Karna	waited	anxiously	behind	his	father.	Kripa	stopped	his	arguments	and	looked
at	Athiratha	in	surprise.	What	was	a	charioteer	doing	here?
“Swami,	I	have	a	humble	request...”
“I	 am	 broke	 as	 an	 earthen	 pot.	 I	 do	 not	 have	 any	 money	 to	 lend	 you.	 If	 I	 had,	 I
would	have	enjoyed	a	few	more	mugs	of	wine	in	the	tavern.”	The	Acharya	broke
into	boisterous	laughter.
Karna	 knew	 Kripa	 was	 a	 maverick	 Brahmin,	 who	 did	 not	 care	 for	 social	 and
ethical	 norms.	 Now	 that	 Acharya	 Drona	 had	 come,	 there	 were	 murmurs	 in	 the
palace	that	Kripa,	for	all	his	learning	and	skill	with	arms,	would	be	fired	as	the
Princes’	 tutor.	 Kripa	 behaved	 as	 if	 he	 had	 not	 a	 care	 in	 the	 world.	 He	 could	 be
seen	 in	 the	 tavern	 from	 early	 morning,	 laughing	 with	 his	 cronies,	 when	 other
members	 of	 his	 caste	 were	 busy	 with	 prayers	 and	 ablution.	 The	 conservative
Brahmin	 community	 viewed	 his	 genius	 as	 a	 threat	 to	 their	 cloistered	 existence.
The	other	problem	was	that	he	was	far	better	versed	in	the	scriptures	than	any	of

them;	and	he	was	always	looking	for	an	argument	or	fight,	with	anyone	who	dared
to	challenge	him.	They	had	no	answers	to	his	questions	about	the	scriptures	and	he
deliberately	mocked	the	rigid	caste	rules	by	openly	flouting	them	and	then	quoting
the	Vedas	and	Upanishads	to	justify	his	actions.	Karna	knew	his	father	nursed	the
faint	hope	that	this	maverick	would	help	them.
“Swami,	I	do	not	seek	alms.	This	is	my	son,	Karna.	He	desires	to	be	a	warrior	and
learn	from	you.”
“Aha!	He	wants	to	be	a	warrior.”	Kripa	jumped	down	from	the	platform	he	had
been	perched	on	and	rushed	towards	Karna.	He	stopped	inches	short	of	Karna’s
face	 and	 peered	 into	 his	 eyes.	 Karna	 recoiled	 instinctively	 and	 retreated	 a	 few
feet.	 He	 was	 afraid	 of	 accidentally	 touching	 the	 Brahmin	 and	 breaking	 the	 caste
taboos.	Karna	could	see	his	father’s	shocked	face.	Kripa	had	already	broken	the
caste	 rules	 by	 coming	 so	 near.	 The	 Priest	 at	 the	 temple	 was	 watching	 the	 scene
from	 the	 gate,	 a	 deepening	 frown	 on	 his	 face.	 Kripa	 pushed	 the	 boy	 and	 Karna
staggered	back.	Then	he	grabbed	Karna	by	his	long	hair	and	lifted	him	with	one
hand.	He	slapped	Karna	across	the	face	and	punched	him	in	the	stomach	with	his
strong	left	hand.	Karna	winced	in	pain	but	refused	to	cry	out.
“Swami...	Swami...	do	not	beat	him,”	Athiratha	implored.
“Fool!	You	think	this	is	a	beating?	Your	boy	has	courage.	With	proper	training,	he
can	be	a	good	warrior.	He	can	withstand	pain.”	Kripa	dropped	Karna;	then	swiftly
and	gracefully	jumped	back	onto	the	platform.	He	sat	down,	his	fingers	caressing
his	flowing	black	beard.
“Will	you	teach	him,	Swami?”	Athiratha	could	barely	hold	back	his	tears	of	joy.
“Why	not?”	A	mischievous	smile	played	on	Kripa’s	thick	lips.
“He	is	a	Suta...	I	mean	we	are	of	the	Shudra	varna,	Swami.”
“He	may	be	Naga,	Nishada,	or	Mlecha.	Why	should	that	concern	me?	He	will	be	a
good	warrior.”	Kripa	looked	at	Karna,	who	was	beaming	with	pride	and	joy.
“When	 should	 he	 come,	 Swami?”	 asked	 Athiratha,	 his	 head	 bowed	 over	 his
folded	hands.

“As	soon	as	you	can	arrange	1000	gold	coins,”	Kripa	replied,	his	face	impassive.
“Swami…”	 Athiratha	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 ears!	 Even	 if	 he	 served	 the
Hastinapura	government	until	he	was	60	years	old,	he	would	not	earn	1000	gold
coins.	“We	are	poor,	Swami...”
“That	is	not	my	fault,	dear	friend.	I	do	not	care	what	caste	your	son	is.	I	care	for
money.	Wine	is	expensive	and	so	are	all	the	other	good	things	in	life.	My	gambling
skills	are	inferior	to	my	skill	in	arms.	When	you	can	pay,	send	your	son	and	I	shall
make	him	the	best	warrior	in	India.	Otherwise,	he	can	learn	to	be	a	charioteer	like
you.”
“But	Swami...”
“Fool!	I	 do	not	have	the	whole	day	to	 waste	in	 speaking	to	you.	My	friends	are
getting	impatient.	Come	with	the	money	and	we	shall	talk.”	Kripa	turned	his	back
to	them	and	resumed	his	game	of	dice.
Father	 and	 son	 stood	 in	 silence.	 Not	 a	 word	 passed	 between	 them.	 The	 sun	 had
climbed	 high	 in	 the	 sky	 and	 dust	 swirled	 in	 the	 hot	 wind	 from	 the	 plains.	 The
Priest	had	gone	into	the	temple	with	a	rich	merchant	who	had	come	with	offerings.
Karna	could	not	face	his	father.	The	slap	and	punch	he	had	received	from	Kripa
had	begun	to	hurt.	It	would	have	been	better	if	he	had	refused	to	teach	a	Shudra.
Karna	turned	away	in	shame.
Athiratha	 put	 a	 hand	 on	 Karna’s	 shoulder.	 When	 the	 boy	 looked	 up,	 he	 saw	 his
father’s	 eyes	 glistening	 with	 unshed	 tears.	 At	 that	 moment,	 Karna	 hated	 himself.
Why	could	he	not	be	like	the	other	boys	of	his	caste	and	age?	A	warrior!	And	he
the	son	of	a	charioteer.	Karna	vowed	to	learn	his	caste	job	and	try	to	become	the
best	charioteer	in	the	land,	and	make	his	father	proud.
“Karna,	do	not	worry.	We	will	find	a	way.	At	least	he	did	not	refuse	to	teach	you
saying	you	are	of	inferior	caste.	I	can	sell	the	chariot	and	our	hut	may	fetch	a	few
hundred	coins.	I	will	find	some	other	work.	We	will	find	a	way.”
“I	do	not	want	to	be	a	warrior,	father.	Let	us	forget	about	it.	It	was	but	a	stupid
dream.”
“Karna...	listen	to	me...”

“I	no	longer	wish	to	be	a	warrior,	father.	Teach	me	how	to	drive	the	chariot.	Do
not	 say	 you	 will	 sell	 the	 chariot	 and	 house	 for	 my	 sake.”	 Karna	 trembled	 with
anger	and	shame.
Passing	 pedestrians	 stopped	 to	 look	 at	 them.	 Hearing	 the	 commotion,	 Kripa
turned.	 Karna’s	 heart	 missed	 a	 beat.	 Perhaps	 it	 had	 been	 one	 of	 the	 Acharya’s
practical	 jokes	 and	 he	 would	 now	 call	 them	 and	 say	 he	 had	 asked	 for	 the	 1000
gold	coins	in	jest	and	that	Karna	could	join	his	classes	the	next	day.
“Go	away,	you	scoundrels.	What	a	ruckus	you	make!	By	Nandi,	one	cannot	even
play	a	game	of	dice	without	being	distracted	by	idiots	screaming	their	heads	off.”
Kripa	threw	in	a	few	choice	expletives	for	good	measure.
The	 temple	 bell	 clanged	 as	 father	 and	 son	 started	 back	 towards	 their	 hut.	 The
occasional	cawing	of	the	crows	and	the	laughter	and	shouts	from	Kripa’s	group,
was	 carried	 to	 them	 on	 the	 oppressive	 air	 as	 they	 walked	 forlornly	 through	 the
dusty	 streets.	 Once	 they	 reached	 home,	 Karna	 went	 to	 the	 well	 in	 the	 backyard
without	a	word.	He	looked	at	the	wavering	reflection	of	his	handsome	face	in	the
dark	 waters	 deep	 below.	 For	 a	 moment	 he	 was	 tempted	 to	 jump	 in	 and	 finish
everything.	Then	he	heard	his	mother’s	sobs	and	his	father’s	broken	voice,	and	he
gritted	his	teeth.	‘I	have	a	duty	to	serve	my	parents,’	he	thought.	It	broke	his	heart
to	 think	 he	 would	 be	 nothing	 but	 a	 common	 charioteer	 all	 his	 life.	 If	 not	 for	 the
love	he	bore	his	parents,	he	would	have	taken	refuge	in	the	dark	waters	of	the	well
that	day.
***

Until	Vidhura	said	he	would	recommend	Karna	to	Acharya	Drona,	father	and	son
had	never	again	spoken	of	the	incident	with	Kripa.	Karna	had	lost	all	hope	of	ever
becoming	a	warrior	and	reconciled	himself	to	a	life	of	servitude.	Now,	fresh	hope
sprouted	a	tiny	shoot	in	his	mind.	Finally,	Lord	Shiva	had	shown	mercy	towards	a
poor	Suta	boy.
Karna	 was	 up	 well	 before	 dawn	 to	 complete	 his	 morning	 ablutions.	 He	 could
hardly	contain	his	excitement.	He	paced	up	and	down	in	the	small	mud	verandah,
waiting	for	his	father	to	emerge.	Even	the	harsh	cawing	of	crows	was	like	music
to	 his	 ears.	 A	 few	 early	 risers	 were	 hurrying	 to	 the	 river	 ghat	 and	 the	 breeze

carried	 the	 fragrance	 of	 jasmine	 and	 the	 faint	 tinkling	 of	 temple	 bells	 in	 the
distance.	 Radha	 came	 out	 first	 and	 handed	 Karna	 a	 cup	 of	 milk.	 He	 drank	 it
impatiently	 and	 put	 down	 the	 brass	 tumbler	 with	 a	 clang	 on	 the	 floor.	 Then	 she
fussed	with	his	hair	and	earrings.
“Where	 is	 my	 father?”	 Karna	 asked,	 trying	 to	 get	 away	 from	 the	 affectionate
attentions	of	his	mother.	He	saw	his	mother	smile	and	knew	she	would	be	running
to	tell	the	neighbours	about	their	good	fortune	the	moment	they	had	stepped	out	of
the	hut.	At	last	his	father	emerged	from	his	prayer	room.	Karna	jumped	down	from
the	veranda	and	ran	into	the	street.
“Karna,	do	not	be	so	impatient.	Have	you	prayed?”
Karna	felt	irritated.	He	had	done	all	that	early	in	the	morning	but	the	last	thing	he
wanted	right	now	was	an	argument	with	his	father.	He	stopped	and	looked	up	at
the	sky	turning	saffron	in	the	east.	A	glorious	sun	shone	down	benevolently.	Karna
closed	his	eyes	as	if	to	capture	the	beautiful	sight	and	hold	it	firmly	in	his	mind.
No	 words	 of	 prayer	 came	 to	 him.	 His	 emotions	 were	 so	 intense	 that	 he	 was
thankful	for	the	absence	of	words.	He	felt	one	with	the	shining	sun.	It	caressed	him
with	 its	 all-pervading	 touch	 and	 he	 felt	 soothed,	 contented	 and	 happy.	 When
Athiratha’s	hand	fell	on	his	shoulder,	Karna	reluctantly	came	out	of	his	trance.	He
smiled	 and	 began	 walking	 quickly	 towards	 the	 palace.	 Athiratha	 looked	 back	 at
his	wife	standing	in	front	of	their	hut,	with	tears	in	her	eyes.	He	turned	away	lest
she	see	the	tears	brimming	in	his	own.	Karna	was	already	many	paces	ahead	and
Athiratha	 walked	 quickly	 to	 catch	 up	 with	 his	 energetic	 son.	 They	 went	 past	 the
temple	 and	 the	 Banyan	 tree,	 where	 once	 again	 Kripa	 and	 his	 friends	 were
absorbed	 in	 their	 game	 of	 dice.	 Acharya	 Kripa	 called	 out	 to	 Athiratha,	 but	 the
charioteer	and	his	son	did	not	have	time	to	listen	as	they	hurried	past	–	the	loud
laughter	of	the	decadent	Brahmin	ringing	in	their	ears.
The	 guards	 stopped	 them	 at	 the	 inner	 gate	 of	 the	 fort.	 They	 stated	 their	 purpose.
The	captain	of	the	guards	looked	at	them	suspiciously	before	sending	a	soldier	to
the	palace	with	a	message.	After	a	while,	the	messenger	returned	to	say	Vidhura
was	 in	 conference	 with	 Lord	 Bhishma.	 They	 were	 asked	 to	 wait.	 They	 waited
outside	 the	 gate	 until	 the	 sun	 grew	 impossibly	 hot	 and	 their	 shadows	 shortened
into	dark	pools	around	their	feet.	Each	passing	moment	filled	them	with	anxiety.
Every	time	a	soldier	came	from	the	palace,	their	hearts	beat	faster.	When	they	had
almost	given	up	hope,	thinking	the	Prime	Minister	had	forgotten	his	words,	the	call

came.	 The	 guard	 pointed	 to	 Vidhura,	 standing	 in	 a	 corner	 of	 the	 palace	 gardens.
They	could	hear	the	faint	clash	of	swords,	with	Drona	barking	instructions.
Vidhura	smiled	at	them,	apologising	for	the	delay.	Karna	could	not	decide	whether
he	was	a	phony	or	a	truly	great	man,	to	be	so	humble.	They	crossed	the	inner	and
outer	 fort	 gates	 together	 and	 entered	 the	 palace	 orchards.	 As	 they	 neared	 the
training	 grounds,	 Karna	 saw	 that	 Prince	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 brother	 Sushasana
were	 on	 their	 knees	 in	 a	 corner,	 their	 heads	 hanging	 in	 shame.	 Drona	 was
occupied	in	correcting	the	stance	and	aim	of	Arjuna,	the	middle	Pandava	Prince.	A
small	Brahmin	boy,	who	resembled	Drona,	was	collecting	the	arrows	shot	by	the
Princes,	while	a	hefty	boy	practiced	with	a	mace.	The	other	boys	watched	Arjuna
as	 he	 drew	 his	 bowstring.	 The	 arrow	 missed	 the	 target	 by	 a	 whisker	 and	 Drona
shook	 his	 head	 in	 irritation.	 But	 Karna	 was	 impressed	 by	 the	 boy’s	 proficiency.
He	 shot	 like	 a	 seasoned	 warrior	 and	 it	 had	 only	 been	 a	 few	 weeks	 since	 Drona
had	started	his	training.	‘Perhaps	I	will	be	able	to	shoot	like	that	one	day,’	thought
the	son	of	the	charioteer.
“Guru–,”	Vidhura	called	out	to	Drona	respectfully.
For	a	long	minute,	the	Guru	did	not	acknowledge	their	presence.	When	he	turned,
Karna	flinched	at	his	expression.	Instinctively	he	knew	what	was	coming.
“Yes,	Prime	Minister.	What	can	I	do	for	you?”	Drona	silenced	his	students	with	a
gesture.
“This	is	Karna.”	Vidhura	pulled	the	boy	from	behind	his	father.	“Son	of	my	friend,
Athiratha.”
“I	am	in	the	middle	of	a	class,	Prime	Minister.”
“Guru,	Karna	wishes	to	learn	from	you...”
Karna	 could	 sense	 the	 lack	 of	 confidence	 in	 the	 Prime	 Minister’s	 voice.	 Drona
remained	 silent	 for	 a	 long	 time	 and	 Karna’s	 heart	 almost	 stopped	 beating.	 He
clenched	his	fists.
“I	train	the	Royal	Family,	Prime	Minister,”	Drona	said	finally.
“Yesterday,	this	boy	did	a	great	service	to	our	kingdom.	I	promised...”

“Prime	 Minister,	 I	 have	 to	 reiterate	 that	 these	 classes	 are	 only	 for	 the	 Princes.”
Drona	looked	away,	crossing	his	hands	over	his	chest.
“I	have	spoken	to	His	Excellency	Bhishma.	He	has	said	that	if	you	agree,	he	does
not	have	any	problem	with	this	boy’s	inclusion.	In	fact,	he	said	Hastinapura	needs
all	the	warriors	it	can	get.”
“Honourable	 Prime	 Minister,	 I	 did	 not	 wish	 to	 say	 this	 but	 alas	 you	 force	 the
words	from	my	mouth.	Ask	him	which	caste	he	belongs	to.”
“But	how	does	it...”
“I	understand	your	sympathies	as	you	too,	belong	to	these	people.	He	is	a	Suta,	a
lowly	charioteer	caste.	I	am	a	Brahmin.	Yet	you	expect	me	to	teach	him?”
Vidhura’s	face	flushed	with	shame	and	embarrassment.	In	the	court	hierarchy,	he
was	far	above	Guru	Drona	but	he	lacked	the	confidence	to	confront	someone	who
was	his	superior	by	caste.	Karna	did	not	want	to	hear	the	rest	of	the	argument.	He
knew	it	was	over.	His	father	held	him	still	but	Karna	could	not	control	his	tears.
Drona	turned	to	Vidhura	defiantly.	“Do	not	think	you	can	come	here	and	push	me
into	taking	a	low-caste	boy	as	my	student.	As	Prime	Minister,	you	can	discharge
me	 from	 my	 job.	 If	 you	 order	 it,	 I	 will	 take	 my	 wife	 and	 son	 and	 leave
Hastinapura.	 I	 may	 starve	 or	 get	 a	 job	 in	 another	 kingdom	 where	 they	 respect
Brahmins	and	do	not	force	them	to	act	against	their	faith.	Starvation	is	better	than
taking	orders	from	a	Shudra.	Do	whatever	you	and	Lord	Bhishma	wish,	but	I	will
not	teach	a	low-caste.”
Prince	Suyodhana	stood	up	from	his	kneeling	position.	Drona	saw	it.	“You	fool!
Do	 you	 think	 you	 can	 act	 impudently	 in	 my	 class?	 Do	 as	 you	 were	 ordered.”
Suyodhana	sank	back	onto	his	knees.
“Drona,	you	have	insulted	the	country	and	the	Crown	Prince	by	your	words!	There
are	limits...”	Vidhura	drew	his	sword.
“Are	you	threatening	me,	you	low-caste?	A	Shudra	Prime	Minister,	a	blind	King,
and	 an	 arrogant	 Crown	 Prince!	 No	 wonder	 a	 Suta	 wants	 to	 become	 a	 warrior.
Next,	a	Nishada	will	apply	to	become	my	student!”

Karna	 felt	 greater	 pain	 for	 the	 Prime	 Minister	 than	 for	 himself.	 He	 could	 see
Vidhura	was	trying	to	control	his	anger.
“You	 will	 hear	 from	 Lord	 Bhishma.”	 Vidhura	 bowed	 deeply	 to	 Drona,
emphasizing	the	courtesy.
The	 mocking	 bow	 was	 worse	 than	 a	 blow.	 “You...	 you...	 how	 dare	 you	 insult	 a
Brahmin?	 Let	 me	 see	 whether	 Hastinapura	 has	 ears	 for	 the	 cry	 of	 a	 Brahmin	 or
only	listens	to	the	complaints	of	a	Shudra.	Now	get	out	of	the	training	ground.	This
place	is	for	Kshatriyas	and	not	people	like	you.	Take	the	chariot	driver	and	your
equals	from	here.	I	will	answer	to	the	Regent	of	the	Kurus.”
Without	 another	 word,	 Vidhura	 walked	 away.	 Karna	 followed	 him,	 his	 head
bowed.	 Only	 Athiratha	 lingered	 a	 moment,	 before	 finally	 walking	 away	 with	 a
heavy	heart.
***

Drona	 did	 not	 want	 to	 face	 the	 poor	 chariot	 driver.	 He	 knew	 the	 boy	 had	 the
makings	 of	 a	 great	 warrior.	 He	 had	 seen	 him	 defend	 the	 fort	 the	 night	 of
Takshaka’s	 raid.	 Unfortunately,	 he	 belonged	 to	 the	 wrong	 caste.	 As	 a	 human,
Drona	 could	 sympathize	 with	 a	 father	 who	 wished	 to	 fulfil	 his	 son’s	 ambitions.
But	 his	 own	 Guru,	 Parashurama,	 had	 trained	 him	 to	 believe	 in	 the	 purity	 and
sanctity	of	caste	and	he	did	not	dare	break	those	rules.	He	was	unlike	his	brotherin-law,	Kripa,	whom	he	both	detested	and	feared.	Kripa	was	a	greater	scholar	and
perhaps	a	better	warrior	than	he	was,	but	he	was	an	unreliable	maverick.	Kripa
found	pleasure	in	deliberately	breaking	the	rules.	Drona	could	not	afford	to	do	so.
‘I	have	a	son	to	bring	up,’	thought	Drona,	looking	at	Aswathama,	his	eyes	alight
with	 affection.	 But	 Aswathama’s	 eyes	 were	 fixed	 upon	 the	 charioteer’s	 son
walking	 away.	 ‘My	 boy	 was	 so	 sweet	 until	 he	 met	 that	 rascal,	 Suyodhana.	 He
spoilt	 my	 boy,’	 thought	 the	 Guru	 with	 deep	 resentment.	 But	 Hastinapura	 paid	 its
employees	well.	And	now	there	was	the	worry	whether	Vidhura	would	poison	the
Regent’s	mind	and	have	him	thrown	out.	Would	he	be	impoverished	again?	What
would	 happen	 to	 his	 son?	 And	 all	 because	 of	 a	 stupid	 charioteer	 who	 dreamt
beyond	his	position?
Suyodhana	reminded	Drona	of	his	brother-in-law,	Kripa,	except	that	the	 lad	had
greater	 willpower.	 The	 boy	 questioned	 everything.	 His	 doubts	 were	 mostly

unanswerable.	 He	 made	 Drona	 feel	 inadequate.	 So	 Drona	 reacted	 with	 the
viciousness	that	only	teachers	are	capable	of	towards	students	they	do	not	like.	He
thought	the	boy	arrogant	and	attacked	him	where	he	knew	it	would	hurt	the	most	–
comparing	his	skill	and	intelligence	to	the	Pandavas’;	and	belittling	him	whenever
he	 could.	 He	 wanted	 to	 crush	 the	 boy’s	 rebellious	 spirit	 and	 mellow	 him	 so	 he
would	 fit	 into	 society.	 Drona	 knew	 instinctively	 that	 such	 spirit	 in	 a	 powerful
person	 could	 only	 bring	 about	 disaster.	 If	 the	 wild	 forces	 in	 the	 boy	 were	 not
tamed,	he	could	shake	the	country	and	impose	his	will	on	it.	As	a	teacher,	Drona
considered	it	his	duty	to	mould	his	students	to	fit	into	society.	Teaching	was	not
about	 making	 rebels	 who	 would	 challenge	 and	 change	 the	 established	 order.	 He
was	sure	that	ultimately	everybody,	including	the	Gods	and	god	men,	conspired	to
pull	down	such	rebels	and	crush	them	into	the	dust.	That	was	what	the	history	of
this	 country	 had	 taught	 him.	 The	 rise	 and	 fall	 of	 men	 like	 Ravana,	 Bali,	 and
Mahabali,	 were	 incontrovertible	 proof	 of	 this.	 Society	 was	 sanathana,	 eternal
and	unchanging.	Rebels	and	reformers	had	only	one	place	to	go	in	such	a	country,
and	the	Gods	took	on	avatars	to	grind	such	rebels	into	the	dust.	That	was	dharma
–	to	protect	which,	they	took	human	birth.
Drona	 beat	 Suyodhana	 at	 the	 slightest	 provocation	 and	 meted	 out	 insulting
punishments.	 On	 the	 days	 when	 even	 this	 did	 not	 move	 the	 stubborn	 Prince	 to
tears,	 he	 would	 use	 the	 ultimate	 punishment	 –	 call	 him	 and	 his	 brothers	 sons	 of
Andha,	 like-father-like-sons,	 unable	 to	 see	 right	 from	 wrong.	 That	 silenced	 the
Prince	for	the	day,	while	the	five	Pandavas	laughed	at	the	Guru’s	comments	about
their	 cousins.	 Drona	 thought	 morosely	 that	 he	 was	 not	 the	 only	 one	 crushing	 the
dangerous	 spirit	 in	 the	 boy,	 and	 currying	 favour.	 After	 him,	 his	 son	 Aswathama
would	inherit	his	post	of	Raja	Guru	and	advisor	to	a	future	generation	of	Princes.
There	would	be	no	place	for	Shudra	usurpers	like	Vidhura	in	that	beautiful	world.
When	 he	 saw	 Aswathama	 talking	 to	 Suyodhana,	 Drona	 lost	 his	 temper	 and
thrashed	his	son	until	his	own	hands	ached.	He	vented	all	the	pent-up	anger	over
his	 poverty,	 his	 confrontation	 with	 Vidhura,	 his	 fears	 and	 complexes,	 on
Aswathama’s	 small	 body.	 He	 pushed	 the	 bawling	 boy	 towards	 the	 Pandavas,
forcing	him	to	sit	next	to	Arjuna,	his	favourite	student.	Arjuna	hid	a	smile	at	the
plight	of	the	Guru’s	son.	And	while	the	Guru	was	shouting	at	Suyodhana,	Bhima
managed	 to	 pinch	 Aswathama	 twice	 and	 call	 him	 a	 sissy.	 The	 boy	 cried	 louder,
only	to	be	beaten	by	his	father	again.
From	the	thick	green	foliage	of	the	mango	trees,	two	pairs	of	dark	eyes	watched

this	drama	unfold.	While	the	Guru	was	beating	his	son,	Jara	asked	Ekalavya,	“You
think	he	will	teach	you	now?	He	was	not	even	ready	to	teach	a	boy	like	Karna.	We
are	Nishadas,	far	below	Sutas.”
“Shut	up,	you	fool!	You	talk	too	much.	I	am	going	to	learn	from	him.	One	can	learn
as	 much	 by	 sitting	 here	 as	 by	 being	 there,	 like	 poor	 Suyodhana.	 We	 will	 watch
what	 he	 teaches	 Arjuna	 and	 learn.	 No	 one,	 not	 even	 Drona,	 is	 going	 to	 stop	 me
learning	 from	 him.	 And	 one	 day	 I	 will	 surprise	 him	 by	 defeating	 his	 favourite,
Arjuna.”	 Ekalavya	 turned	 to	 kick	 Jara,	 who	 was	 laughing	 at	 these	 audacious
dreams.
***

“You	are	late	again.”	Parshavi	placed	a	simple	meal	before	her	husband	and	sat
down.
Vidhura	 merely	 smiled	 at	 her	 and	 began	 eating	 reluctantly.	 “Enough,”	 he	 finally
said,	refusing	a	second	helping	and	standing	up.	“Are	the	boys	asleep?”	he	asked,
as	he	wiped	his	hands	dry	on	the	towel	Parshavi	handed	him.
“You	are	asking	as	if	it	is	something	uncommon.	You	do	not	even	come	home	but
sleep	in	your	office	so	many	nights.	When	you	do	come	home,	it	is	almost	time	for
you	to	go	back.	Why	are	you	working	like	this?”
“Parshavi,	you	do	not	know	the	pressure	we	are	under.	I	feel	sorry	for	Bhishma.
The	old	man	is	carrying	the	burden	of	the	entire	country	on	his	tired	shoulders.	It
is	my	duty…”
“Don’t	you	have	any	duty	towards	your	family?	Should	I	remind	the	great	scholar
about	your	duty	towards	your	sons?	You	are	the	Prime	Minister	but	just	see	how
we	live.	We	do	not	even	have	a	house	to	call	our	own.	You	do	not	wish	us	to	have
any	 servants.	 You	 use	 the	 chariot	 only	 on	 official	 duty.	 You	 could	 save	 time	 by
using	it	instead	of	walking	all	the	way	to	your	office	and	back	and	spend	that	time
with	us.	You	seem	to	enjoy	poverty.	We	are	the	laughing	stock	of	our	neighbours.
Even	 junior	 government	 officials	 live	 better	 than	 we	 do.	 You	 are	 the	 King’s
brother,	yet	see	how	we	live.	Is	Bhishma	unaware	of	this?”
“We	 have	 had	 this	 conversation	 many	 times,	 Parshavi.”	 Vidhura	 hurried	 to	 the
room	where	his	twin	sons	slept.	He	sat	near	them,	quietly	watching	their	faces.

“We	should	think	about	them.	The	times	are	uncertain.	Our	boys	are	good	students
but	 will	 they	 have	 jobs	 when	 they	 grow	 up?	 All	 the	 positions	 are	 reserved	 for
Brahmins.	I	am	afraid	for	their	future.”
“Parshavi,	 trust	 in	 God.	 We	 have	 not	 wronged	 anyone.	 Trust	 in	 the	 goodness	 of
people.	Worrying	too	much	about	the	future	shows	your	lack	of	faith	in	God.”
“Then	why	are	you	and	Bhishma	so	worried	about	the	future	of	the	country?	Why
not	leave	it	to	God?”	Parshavi	regretted	the	retort	as	soon	as	she	uttered	it.	Her
husband	 was	 sensitive	 about	 his	 country.	 She	 watched	 as	 he	 rose	 and	 moved	 to
their	bedroom	without	a	word.
When	she	finished	her	chores	and	entered	the	room,	he	was	lying	with	his	face	to
the	wall.	She	sat	on	the	edge	of	the	bed,	searching	for	the	right	words	to	melt	the
ice	between	them.
He	suddenly	turned	and	said,	“I	sometimes	wonder	whether	all	the	hard	work	I	put
in	is	of	any	use.”
She	gripped	his	hand.”	What	has	happened?”
“Nothing	 really.	 I	 only	 wanted	 to	 do	 something	 good	 for	 a	 poor	 boy	 and	 was
insulted	 by	 the	 Guru	 and	 lost	 face.	 Ultimately	 everything	 boils	 down	 to	 caste	 in
this	country.”
She	 knew	 when	 to	 remain	 silent.	 She	 sat	 listening	 to	 his	 deep	 breathing.	 It	 was
almost	dawn.
“We	will	build	our	own	house.	You	are	right.	When	we	are	gone,	the	boys	should
have	at	least	a	roof	over	their	heads.”	The	words	were	almost	inaudible.
Parshavi	 did	 not	 say	 anything.	 She	 had	 heard	 about	 the	 house	 they	 would	 build
many	times	before.	She	did	not	wish	to	argue	with	her	husband	again.	Instead,	she
quietly	 slipped	 under	 the	 quilt	 and	 put	 her	 hand	 on	 his	 chest.	 She	 could	 feel	 his
heart	thumping	under	her	fingers	as	she	slipped	into	a	disturbed	sleep.
***

Karna	sat	in	a	corner	of	his	hut,	staring	into	the	darkness.	He	was	not	dreaming	of

challenging	Arjuna	one	day.	He	was	thinking	of	the	best	way	to	end	his	miserable,
worthless,	Suta	life.

5	THE	MAVERICK	BRAHMIN
KRIPA	 CURSED	 THE	 MOSQUITOES	 BOTHERING	 HIM.	 He	 had	 once	 again	 lost	 money

while	 gambling	 and	 did	 not	 want	 to	 go	 home	 and	 see	 Kripi’s	 face.	 As	 on	 many
other	nights,	he	decided	to	sleep	under	the	Banyan	tree.	He	knew	his	sister	would
be	 waiting	 for	 him	 even	 though	 his	 hours	 had	 become	 more	 and	 more	 erratic.	 It
was	 a	 mistake	 to	 have	 married	 her	 to	 Drona,	 Kripa	 thought.	 It	 was	 not	 that	 he
hated	his	brother-in-law,	but	he	resented	the	unsolicited	advice	Drona	was	so	fond
of	 giving	 him,	 and	 his	 all-knowing	 attitude.	 It	 was	 a	 hot	 and	 humid	 night.	 A
starless	 and	 damp	 sky	 spread	 over	 him	 like	 a	 wet	 umbrella.	 The	 crickets	 were
creating	an	infernal	racket,	with	the	frogs	joining	in.	He	could	smell	rain	and	hear
the	river	swelling.	If	it	rained	he	would	be	forced	to	go	home.	Kripa	did	not	relish
the	thought	at	all.
The	first	drops	of	rain	fell	on	the	expectant	earth.	What	was	that	noise?	Was	it	a
splash?	Some	idiot	had	jumped	into	the	river	and	was	drowning.	By	Nandi,	why
could	the	rascal	not	have	chosen	some	other	time	to	die,	preferably	when	he	was
not	 around?	 Kripa	 ran	 towards	 the	 water	 and	 saw	 a	 dark	 head	 bobbing	 up	 and
down	in	the	swiftly	flowing	current.	The	last	thing	he	wanted	to	do	was	jump	into
the	 river	 at	 this	 ungodly	 hour.	 The	 fool	 was	 sure	 to	 die	 anyway.	 Kripa	 was	 a
strong	swimmer	but	was	unsure	whether	he	would	be	able	to	drag	the	idiot	back	to
shore.	With	a	resigned	shrug,	he	slapped	his	thighs	and	jumped	into	the	river.
Kripa	gasped	as	the	water	swallowed	him,	surprised	at	the	strength	of	the	current.
It	was	colder	than	he	had	expected	and	the	river	seemed	to	pull	him	into	her	dark
womb	 with	 a	 million	 hands.	 The	 rain	 had	 turned	 into	 a	 squall	 and	 now	 pelted
down	with	brutal	force.	Where	the	hell	was	he	or	she?	Then	Kripa	saw	him,	300
yards	 away,	 bobbing	 up	 and	 down	 in	 the	 water.	 The	 damn	 fellow	 was	 probably
dead	 already.	 Kripa	 uttered	 a	 few	 choice	 expletives	 and	 started	 swimming
towards	 the	 drowning	 figure,	 using	 his	 great	 strength.	 After	 what	 seemed	 like	 a
lifetime,	he	managed	to	grab	the	drowning	man’s	hair	and	began	swimming	back.
Exhausted,	he	dragged	the	comatose	figure	onto	the	bank,	a	mile	from	the	temple
ghat.	He	wanted	to	kick	and	scream	at	the	fool	but	the	fellow	was	unconscious.
After	catching	his	breath,	Kripa	began	pressing	his	quarry’s	stomach	to	expel	the

water	 he	 had	 most	 certainly	 swallowed.	 After	 an	 agony	 of	 waiting,	 Kripa	 was
about	to	give	up	when	the	sodden	and	drenched	body	stirred	into	consciousness.
“Who	the	hell	are	you,	you	fool?”	Kripa	slapped	the	sodden	face	and	heard	a	sob.
“Forgive	me.”
Kripa	was	surprised.	The	voice	had	not	yet	broken;	it	was	that	of	a	boy,	not	some
drunken	 reveller	 as	 he	 had	 expected.	 Kripa	 felt	 sorry	 for	 the	 woebegone	 figure
before	him.	How	much	unhappiness	must	the	boy	have	endured	in	his	short	life	to
compel	him	to	take	such	an	extreme	step?
“What	happened	to	you,	son?	Why	are	you	trying	to	end	your	life?”	Kripa’s	hand
dropped	onto	the	boy’s	head	while	he	tried	to	identify	the	face.
“Swami,	I	am	a	wretched	low-caste,	a	Suta,	a	charioteer’s	son,	and	no	one	wishes
to	teach	me	anything.”
Suta!	It	was	the	son	of	that	chariot	driver,	Athiratha.	He	remembered	the	day	they
had	come	to	him	and	how	he	had	treated	them.	‘Did	I	not	try	to	make	amends?	Did
I	not	call	out	to	them	as	they	passed	today,	to	say	I	accepted	their	request?	But	they
were	in	too	much	of	a	hurry	to	hear	me	out.’	Kripa	tried	to	justify	his	actions	but
knew	he	had	behaved	like	a	rogue.	There	was	no	denying	that.	He	looked	down	at
the	wretched	boy	and	said,	“I	forget	your	name	but	I	remember	you	and	your	father
coming	to	me.	I	am	Kripa.”
“Acharya	Kripa?	Swami,	why	did	you	save	me?	Why	did	you	risk	your	life	for	a
worthless	Suta?”
“Tell	me	your	name.”
“Guru,	I	was	named	Vasusena,	but	am	known	to	all	as	Karna.”
“Karna,	you	fool!	Listen	to	me.	Do	not	keep	repeating	you	are	low-born	and	such
rubbish.	No	one	is	low	or	high.	If	you	accept	you	are	low-born,	the	world	will	be
happy	to	concede	that	to	you.”
“But	I	am	a	charioteer’s	son.”

“You	are	ignorant.	Listen	and	learn	to	keep	your	mouth	shut.	That	will	serve	you
well	in	life.	I	will	tell	you	this	only	once,	for	I	am	giving	this	advice	free	of	cost.	I
ought	to	charge	you	for	it	but	I	owe	you	something	now.	You	allowed	me	to	save
you	from	death	and	that	has	made	me	feel	good	about	myself.	For	a	change,	I	will
teach	you	something	free.	Now,	tell	me	what	made	you	jump	into	the	river	at	this
hour?”
The	rain	had	slackened	a	little	and	Karna	sat	without	moving,	staring	at	the	river
that	hid	so	much.
“I	know	what	you	are	thinking.	You	are	blaming	me	for	what	is	happening	to	you.
You	feel	I	am	heartless	and	the	world	is	cruel.	You	are	cursing	yourself	for	being
born	 poor.	 You	 are	 lamenting	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 have	 a	 mere	 chariot	 driver	 as	 a
parent.	You	look	at	your	dilapidated	hut	and	think	how	nice	it	would	be	to	have
been	born	into	a	rich	home.”
“Swami,	I	did	not…”	Karna	did	not	want	to	look	at	the	Brahmin’s	face.	The	river
offered	more	solace.
“There	is	nothing	wrong	with	such	thoughts.	They	will	make	you	strive	harder	in
life	and	motivate	you	to	achieve	your	dreams,	provided	you	know	how	to	channel
your	frustration	and	anger.	Life	is	a	gamble.	You	do	not	know	how	the	dice	will
fall.	 But	 once	 they	 have,	 how	 you	 move	 the	 pieces	 is	 in	 your	 hands.	 It	 is	 mere
chance	that	you	were	not	born	a	Kshatriya	or	Brahmin.	You	could	have	been	born
a	Nishada	or	Naga,	and	then	your	Suta	home	would	have	looked	like	a	palace.	The
die	has	been	cast	and	you	cannot	do	anything	about	it.	But	you	can	choose	to	be	a
Brahmin	or	Kshatriya	or	Nishada	or	anything	you	want.”
Kripa	smiled	at	Karna’s	confusion.	“Look	at	me	when	I	speak.	You	are	wondering
how	 is	 it	 possible	 to	 be	 something	 else.	 Society	 has	 taught	 fools	 like	 you	 to
believe	 in	 the	 chance	 of	 birth.	 The	 Priests	 have	 told	 you	 that	 if	 you	 are	 born	 a
Brahmin,	only	then	can	you	be	a	Brahmin.	If	your	parents	are	Pariah,	you	will	be	a
slave	 forever	 to	 all	 the	 other	 castes.	 It	 is	 all	 too	 easy	 to	 fool	 the	 people	 of	 our
country.”
“But...	the	Vedas	say...”
“The	Vedas	do	 not	 say	 any	 such	 nonsense.	 The	 majority	 of	 our	 people	 have	 not

even	read	the	Vedas.	Tell	me,	who	is	a	Brahmin?”
“You	are...	Acharya	Kripa...”
“If	 we	 go	 strictly	 by	 the	 Vedas,	 a	 Brahmin	 is	 one	 who	 has	 sought	 and	 found
brahma;	 one	 who	 has	 found	 God	 within	 himself,	 in	 his	 thoughts,	 gained	 through
knowledge.	Do	Drona	or	I	look	like	we	have	found	God?	I	cannot	even	find	the
way	to	my	house	on	most	days!	A	Kshatriya	is	supposed	to	be	one	who	has	found
God	in	action,	by	doing	his	duty.	A	Vaishya	is	one	who	has	found	God	in	trade,	by
creating	 wealth;	 and	 a	 Shudra	 is	 one	 who	 has	 found	 God	 in	 love,	 by	 serving
society.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	where	or	to	whom	anyone	is	born.	You	could	be
the	Shudra	son	of	a	Brahmin	father	or	vice	versa.	Whatever	the	silly	Priests	say,
nowhere	in	any	of	our	scriptures	is	it	written	that	any	one	way	of	finding	God	is
better	than	all	the	others.	They	do	not	even	say	that	finding	God	is	better	than	not
doing	 so.	 The	 Vedic	 mind	 wonders	 about	 the	 mysteries	 of	 creation	 and	 the
universe,	 but	 it	 does	 not	 speak	 in	 the	 voice	 of	 absolute	 truth.	 The	 Vedas	 merely
hold	the	wonder	of	Man	regarding	the	universe	in	which	he	lives.”
“Guru,	what	you	say	must	be	true,	but	what	about	the	society	in	which	we	live?”
“The	Vedas	are	clear	about	society.	For	society	to	have	balance,	all	four	varnas
are	 required.	 Knowledge,	 thought,	 direction,	 action,	 power,	 leadership,	 wealth,
money,	 art,	 love	 –	 are	 like	 the	 organs	 of	 the	 body.	 One	 cannot	 say	 only	 one	 is
important.	That	is	why	it	is	said	the	four	varnas	are	the	four	parts	of	Brahma.	You
may	 have	 heard	 pseudo-Brahmins	 boasting	 of	 how	 they	 emerged	 from	 Brahma’s
head;	 the	 Kshatriyas	 from	 his	 arms;	 the	 Vaishyas	 from	 his	 thighs.”	 Kripa	 paused
and	smiled	at	Karna.	“And...”
“And	 Shudras	 like	 me	 originated	 from	 the	 feet	 of	 God,”	 Karna	 said,	 looking
straight	at	the	Brahmin.
“Feeling	glum	about	it,	are	we	Karna?”	laughed	Kripa,	lifting	an	eyebrow	in	his
own	inimitable	style.	“Our	scriptures	used	this	allegory	to	show	that	each	varna	is
equally	important.	But	see	what	is	happening	now.	The	head	is	claiming	that	only
it	is	important.	How	stupid!	Without	the	heart,	the	head	is	dead.	Without	hands,	the
body	cannot	act,	and	without	thighs,	the	legs	will	not	remain	connected	to	the	body
or	 move.	 Now	 the	 head	 is	 claiming	 that	 it	 does	 not	 need	 the	 legs!	 The	 head	 has
become	 rotten	 with	 no	 exercise.	 Instead,	 it	 has	 ordered	 the	 heart	 to	 cut	 off	 the

blood	supply	to	the	legs.	Hence,	society	is	incapable	of	going	anywhere.	The	arms
just	 flay	 and	 occasionally	 beat	 each	 other.	 Sometimes	 they	 clap	 and	 make	 loud
noises,	 but	 it	 means	 nothing.	 The	 head	 produces	 some	 smritis,	 useless
philosophical	speculations	and	rituals,	but	nothing	else.	It	has	stopped	producing
anything	useful	for	humanity.	The	thighs	too,	do	not	get	the	protection	of	the	arms,
which	 are	 fighting	 each	 other;	 nor	 do	 they	 receive	 knowledge	 from	 the	 head	 or
movement	 from	 the	 legs.	 They	 stay	 in	 one	 place	 and	 just	 grow	 fat	 and	 ugly,
choking	 the	 blood	 flow	 to	 the	 feet.	 This	 is	 the	 picture	 of	 our	 society	 today.	 The
head,	the	Brahmins,	are	saying	they	do	not	need	the	feet,	the	Shudras.	Where	will
they	go	without	feet?	They	will	simply	remain	where	they	are	and	rot.”
“But	 Guru,	 our	 country	 has	 produced	 great	 thinkers.	 If	 what	 you	 say	 is	 true,
how…”
“Karna,	you	speak	of	the	past,	but	what	about	the	present?	The	barbarian	people
of	 the	 West	 are	 progressing	 quickly	 and	 we	 have	 lost	 our	 advantage.	 If	 we
continue	 to	 deny	 the	 benefits	 of	 education	 to	 the	 majority	 of	 our	 people	 by
claiming	the	false	authority	of	the	scriptures,	one	day	we	will	find	the	barbarians
ruling	us.	The	people,	whom	we	now	contemptuously	call	Mlechas,	will	swarm
across	 our	 country,	 attacking	 us	 from	 the	 borders	 of	 Gandhara	 or	 the	 southern
coast.	But	they	will	find	only	the	hollow	shell	of	our	civilization	left.	The	core	has
already	 rotted.	 They	 will	 only	 need	 to	 give	 a	 slight	 push	 and	 the	 shell	 will
collapse.	 Then	 they	 will	 rule	 us,	 all	 the	 fools;	 Brahmin,	 Kshatriya,	 Vaishya	 and
Shudra	alike,	and	crush	us	underfoot.	I	am	sure	our	frogs-in-the-well	will	say	that
it	is	all	written	in	our	scriptures	and	it	is	but	the	advent	of	the	next	eon,	Kali	Yuga,
or	 some	 such	 nonsense.”	 Kripa	 stopped	 speaking	 and	 gazed	 at	 the	 cloudenveloped	sky	in	silence.
“But	Swami,	it	is	only	by	doing	one’s	kula	dharma	that	one	can	achieve	moksha.”
Karna	had	forgotten	the	rain,	agog	at	the	Acharya’s	words.	It	was	rare	indeed	for
an	adult	to	speak	to	him	about	such	serious	subjects.
“That	is	another	misinterpretation.	What	is	moksha?	It	is	finding	happiness	in	life.
Nothing	 more,	 nothing	 less.	 The	 rest	 is	 pure	 speculation.	 You	 should	 meet	 my
friend,	Carvaka.	He	will	explain	these	things	better	than	I	can.	If	you	think	you	can
find	 happiness	 in	 life	 only	 by	 becoming	 a	 warrior,	 then	 that	 is	 what	 you	 should
strive	for.	There	should	not	be	an	iota	of	doubt	in	your	mind.	No	guru	or	scripture
can	stop	you	if	you	are	determined	to	fight	for	your	goals.”

Kripa	smiled	at	Karna.	‘Does	the	boy	have	it	in	him?’	the	Guru	wondered.
“But	 nobody	 will	 teach	 me	 because	 of	 my	 caste...”	 Karna	 spoke	 the	 only
unshakable	truth	he	knew.
“Aha,	 Vasusena	 Karna!	 I	 hear	 accusation	 against	 me	 in	 your	 tone.	 But	 I	 did	 not
refuse	 you	 because	 of	 your	 caste.	 I	 asked	 for	 my	 fee	 and	 you	 were	 not	 ready	 to
pay.	It	is	not	that	I	care	for	money.	The	six	feet	of	soil	under	the	Banyan	tree	and
the	slice	of	sky	that	peeps	through	its	branches	are	more	than	enough	for	me.	But
never	forget	–	everything	in	life	has	a	price.	Come	to	me	tomorrow	with	whatever
money	you	have	and	I	will	still	teach	you	to	become	the	finest	warrior	in	India.”
“But	 my	 father	 does	 not	 have	 that	 kind	 of	 money...”	 Karna’s	 heart	 raced	 in	 his
chest.
“Bring	what	you	have	but	remember,	like	everything	else	in	life,	the	education	you
receive	will	be	proportionate	to	the	price	you	are	ready	to	pay.	So	what	price	are
you	willing	to	pay,	Karna?”
‘Here	is	the	test,’	thought	Kripa.
“I	can	work	for	you.”
“Ha	ha…	what	work	can	a	boy	like	you	do	for	me?	It	seems	you	are	not	ready	to
pay	any	price	for	your	education.	You	may	think	I	am	cruel	but	I	am	frank	and	I
have	 no	 hidden	 agenda.	 There	 are	 people	 who	 will	 offer	 you	 many	 things	 and
demand	nothing	in	return.	Fear	them	the	most,	for	they	are	the	ones	who	will	take
the	things	that	are	most	precious	to	you	and	then	their	demands	will	come	at	a	time
when	it	is	most	inconvenient	to	you.	In	the	end,	you	will	find	that	my	offer	is	the
cheapest	and	least	harmful.	People	like	you	do	not	like	to	learn	from	men	like	me.
You	learn	only	when	the	toughest	of	gurus	–	life	–	decides	to	teach	you	its	harsh
lessons.	Since	you	are	not	willing	to	bankrupt	your	father	and	have	nothing	useful
to	offer	me,	I	will	give	you	something	equally	useless.	Come	in	the	morning	with
whatever	 small	 change	 you	 have	 and	 I	 will	 teach	 you	 how	 to	 behave	 like	 a
Brahmin.”
“But	I	do	not	want	to	become	a	Priest.”	Karna	jumped	up	in	indignation.
“Listen,	you	young	fool!	Do	you	know	who	the	greatest	living	warrior	in	India	is?

It	 is	 neither	 Drona,	 nor	 the	 great	 Regent	 of	 the	 Kurus	 nor	 I.	 In	 a	 land	 far	 to	 the
south,	lives	a	clan	of	Brahmins.	Thousands	of	years	ago,	perhaps	it	is	just	an	old
wives’	 tale,	 Mahabali,	 the	 great	 Asura	 Emperor,	 ruled	 from	 sea	 to	 sea.	 Vamana
Vishnu	 defeated	 him	 and	 established	 Brahmin	 rule.	 Later,	 the	 great	 Asura	 King,
Ravana,	 overran	 this	 empire	 and	 threw	 out	 these	 groups.	 When	 Ravana	 fell	 in
battle,	thanks	to	the	treason	of	his	brother,	Vibhishana,	the	Brahmins	reassembled.
Under	 the	 patronage	 of	 the	 same	 Vibhishana,	 the	 land	 from	 Gokarna	 to
Kanyakumari	came	under	their	rule.	From	that	time	on,	for	a	thousand	years,	they
have	ruled	the	land	of	the	Asuras	with	an	iron	hand,	reducing	the	Asura	chieftains
to	 mere	 puppets	 while	 imposing	 the	 most	 inhumane	 caste	 system	 ever	 imagined.
You	 think	 being	 born	 a	 Suta	 is	 a	 disadvantage?	 You	 should	 see	 the	 plight	 of	 the
pariahs	 in	 Parashuramakhestra.	 Then	 you	 will	 understand	 what	 disadvantaged
really	means.	It	is	a	beautiful	land	but	like	many	beautiful	things	in	this	world,	it	is
also	deadly	poisonous.”
“Parashurama!	But	he	is	the	enemy	of	Hastinapura!	How	can	I...?”
“Karna,	when	you	want	to	learn,	learn	from	the	best	Guru.	Bhargava	Parashurama,
the	 leader	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 is	 the	 most	 formidable	 warrior	 in	 India
today.	 The	 Parashuramas,	 from	 the	 dawn	 of	 our	 history,	 have	 been	 reckless
warriors.	 They	 have	 conducted	 raid	 upon	 raid	 on	 the	 northern	 kingdoms,	 to
impose	their	religion	and	law.	If	not	for	Sri	Rama,	who	defeated	them	once,	they
would	 have	 eliminated	 all	 the	 Kshatriyas	 from	 the	 plains	 of	 the	 Ganga	 and
Yamuna.	Their	last	raid	was	under	the	guise	of	getting	the	Kashi	Princess,	Amba,
married	to	Bhishma.	It	ended	in	the	present	truce.	But	Bhargava	almost	overran	the
whole	of	Uttarajanapada	then.	They	have	been	a	constant	threat	to	all	the	rulers	of
India	for	a	thousand	years.	For	them,	our	caste	system	is	not	rigid	enough	and	our
religion	 not	 pure	 enough.	 He	 was	 my	 Guru	 and	 Drona’s	 too.	 He	 teaches	 only
Brahmins	 or	 the	 Princes	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate.”	 Kripa	 saw	 the	 shocked
expression	on	Karna’s	young	face	and	chuckled.
“I	am	neither	a	Brahmin	nor	a	Kshatriya,	how	can	I...”
“I	will	teach	you	how	to	behave	like	a	Brahmin	so	you	can	undertake	the	trip	to
his	land	and	learn	from	our	greatest	living	master.	The	best	thing	is	that	he	does
not	charge	money.	Since	you	prefer	to	save	that	ramshackle	horse	and	cart	of	your
father	and	avoid	paying	me.	But	I	warn	you;	you	will	end	by	paying	him	a	heavy
price,	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	money.	However,	I	am	not	concerned	with	all

that.	You	deserve	nothing	better.”
“But	will	it	not	be	a	deception?”
“What	Bhargava	is	doing	is	deception.	His	version	of	the	scriptures	is	so	narrow
that	if	my	friend	Carvaka	hears	it,	he	will	have	a	heart	attack.	Son,	one	day	or	the
other,	he	or	one	of	his	disciples	is	going	to	overrun	the	entire	country	and	impose
their	rule	on	us.	Our	society	is	so	rotten	that	I	have	this	dream	often.	Perhaps	one
day	we	will	find	a	Prince	who	will	take	pity	on	the	plight	of	Man	and	walk	away
from	his	palace	to	live	under	a	tree	 to	seek	enlightenment.	 Perhaps	he	will	give
society	 some	 respite	 from	 self-	 destruction.	 However,	 Bhargava’s	 disciples	 are
sure	to	travel	to	the	four	corners	of	India,	either	with	the	sword	of	the	warrior	or
the	staff	of	the	mendicant.	They	will	thus	destroy	all	the	humanness	achieved	by
benevolent	Princes	and	bring	eternal	doom.”
“Swami,	I	thought	Takshaka	was	the	greater	threat,”	Karna	said.
Kripa	 smiled	 in	 delight	 at	 the	 boy’s	 perceptiveness	 and	 intelligence.	 “Son,
Takshaka	and	Bhargava	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	We,	the	common	people,
will	be	caught	between	such	mad	men.	The	Bhargavas	and	Takshakas	do	not	die,
they	 reincarnate	 with	 different	 names	 in	 different	 times.	 When	 such	 an	 attack
comes,	Hastinapura	will	need	all	its	warriors,	irrespective	of	their	origin.	What
you	do,	you	will	be	doing	for	us	all.	Come	to	me	at	dawn	and	let	us	start	with	the
Gayatri	 mantra.	 Let	 me	 see	 whether	 I	 can	 make	 a	 Brahmin	 of	 a	 Suta.”	 Kripa
walked	away,	leaving	a	drenched	Karna	alone	near	the	swiftly	flowing	river.
Karna	 stood	 for	 a	 long	 time,	 conflicting	 emotions	 gusting	 through	 him	 like	 the
wind	on	a	stormy	night.	When	the	sky	turned	grey	in	the	east,	he	ran	home	to	wash
and	change.	He	hugged	his	surprised	mother,	who	was	watering	the	Tulsi	plant	in
the	courtyard,	and	rushed	out	to	the	river	with	a	dry	cloth.	Today	he	was	going	to
be	a	Brahmin,	and	after	a	few	days,	perhaps	a	Kshatriya.	He	could	be	whatever	he
desired.	 The	 words	 of	 his	 Guru	 were	 imprinted	 on	 his	 mind.	 The	 world	 stood
open	with	so	many	possibilities	for	the	young	boy.

6	CHALLENGE	OF	THE	EUNUCH
“AND	WHAT	IS	THIS	RASCAL’S	CRIME	TODAY?”	 Bhishma	asked	Vidhura,	without	taking

his	stern	gaze	from	Suyodhana.
Before	 Vidhura	 could	 reply,	 Kunti	 stormed	 into	 the	 room,	 accompanied	 by
Dhaumya	and	a	few	other	Priests.	Vidhura	could	see	Bhishma	was	annoyed	by	this
unceremonious	 interruption.	 He	 should	 have	 warned	 the	 Grand	 Regent.	 Vidhura
knew	the	Priests,	under	Dhaumya’s	leadership,	had	gone	to	Kunti.	What	he	had	not
expected	was	that	Kunti	would	accompany	them	to	see	Bhishma.
Dhaumya	 opened	 his	 bundle	 of	 complaints	 against	 Kripa.	 Bhishma	 listened	 to
them	in	growing	impatience.	Finally,	he	responded	that	it	was	a	free	country;	that
everyone	had	the	right	to	believe	what	they	wished	to;	and	to	preach	it	as	well.	If
a	 great	 scholar	 like	 Vyasa	 appreciated	 young	 men	 like	 Kripa	 and	 Carvaka,	 he,
Bhishma,	was	too	humble	a	man	to	judge	otherwise.	The	Priests	could,	of	course,
go	to	Kripa	and	show	him	the	scriptural	authenticity	of	what	they	preached,	such
as	 caste,	 idol	 worship,	 rituals,	 Brahmin	 worship	 and	 so	 on,	 and	 convince	 him
about	the	correctness	of	their	arguments.
At	 this	 masterly	 disposition,	 a	 smile	 tugged	 at	 Vidhura’s	 lips	 and	 this	 infuriated
Kunti	further.	“Pitamaha,	the	men	you	name	are	destroying	our	dharma.”
Bhishma	 turned	 his	 steady	 gaze	 on	 Kunti.	 “Daughter,	 our	 dharma	 is	 sanathana.
They	 cannot	 destroy	 it.	 No	 man	 can.	 They	 are	 merely	 redefining	 it	 to	 suit	 our
times.	Dharma	keeps	evolving	to	suit	the	needs	of	people	in	different	ages.	Some
may	even	say	it	is	our	own	Priests	who	are	destroying	dharma,	by	stifling	it	and
misinterpreting	our	scriptures.	However,	I	am	not	a	scholar	like	Vyasa,	Kripa,	or
even	 Carvaka.	 I	 am	 only	 a	 warrior.	 With	 my	 limited	 knowledge	 and	 common
sense,	I	agree	with	Kripa…	though	perhaps	not	with	Carvaka.	This	is	my	personal
belief.	 I	 do	 not	 impose	 it	 on	 anyone	 else.	 You	 too,	 have	 the	 right	 to	 believe
whatever	 you	 wish.	 I	 will	 not	 allow	 anyone	 to	 trample	 on	 your	 rights.	 If	 Kripa
stops	 people	 from	 giving	 donations	 to	 Priests	 through	 logical	 discourse,	 I	 have
nothing	 to	 say	 for	 you	 too	 can	 go	 out	 and	 convince	 people	 to	 ignore	 Kripa	 and

ensure	they	come	to	you	instead.	That	is	between	you	and	Kripa.	Come	to	me	if
Kripa	 stops	 people	 from	 going	 to	 the	 temple	 forcibly.	 Then	 he	 will	 know	 that
Hastinapura’s	 soldiers	 and	jails	exist	 for	 a	 reason.	This	applies	to	 all	of	you.	If
someone	hurts	Kripa	or	Carvaka,	the	same	rules	apply.”
“But	 Pitamaha…”	 Kunti	 began	 to	 protest.	 Vidhura	 quickly	 began	 arranging	 the
palm	leaves	on	Bhishma’s	table.	He	did	not	want	her	to	see	his	smile.	He	knew
what	was	coming.
“Kunti,	 do	 not	 waste	 your	 time	 and	 mine	 with	 such	 frivolous	 matters.	 You	 have
five	children	to	rear.	If	you	are	interested	in	politics,	why	not	help	your	brotherin-law	 with	 governance?	 This	 is	 not	 an	 easy	 country	 to	 rule,	 even	 for	 a	 sighted
man.”
Kunti	and	the	gaggle	of	Priests	walked	out	in	anger.
Bhishma	looked	at	Suyodhana,	standing	to	one	side	with	his	eyes	on	the	ground,
trying	to	hide	his	anger	and	shame.	“Son,	the	truth	always	prevails.	Look	it	in	the
face.”
Vidhura	had	dragged	Suyodhana	to	Bhishma	just	a	little	while	earlier.	The	second
Pandava	 Prince,	 Bhima,	 had	 broken	 the	 right	 hand	 of	 the	 Kuru	 Prince,	 Vikarna.
The	boy	had	dared	to	call	Bhima	‘Fatso’	and	paid	the	price.	Vikarna’s	howls	of
pain	had	brought	Suyodhana	and	Sushasana	onto	the	scene.	This	had	resulted	in	a
fistfight	in	which	Bhima	thrashed	them	both.	Later,	Suyodhana	and	Sushasana	had
hidden	in	the	dark	and	caught	Bhima	unawares.	They	could	have	murdered	Bhima
had	Vidhura	not	come	upon	them	and	dragged	them	to	Bhishma.	Kunti	had	dragged
away	her	son.
Now,	Bhishma	turned	his	attention	towards	his	grandnephews.	“What	brings	you
all	here?”
“Had	 I	 not	 stopped	 Prince	 Suyodhana,	 we	 would	 have	 been	 trying	 him	 for	 the
murder	 of	 his	 cousin,	 Bhima,”	 Vidhura	 said,	 looking	 sternly	 at	 his	 shamefaced
nephew.
“Pitamaha,	we	were	playing	and	did	not	mean…”
“Suyodhana,	 you	 are	 old	 enough	 now	 to	 understand	 who	 your	 enemies	 are	 and

who	your	friends.	What	is	this	about	trying	to	beat	Bhima	to	death?”
Suyodhana	 turned	 pale	 and	 stood	 shivering	 with	 fear	 before	 the	 Grand	 Regent.
“Answer	me!”	commanded	Bhishma	in	a	voice	that	brooked	no	defiance.
“Pitamaha,	 it	 was	 just	 fun.	 We	 were	 talking...”	 Suyodhana	 stopped,	 unable	 to
continue	before	Bhishma’s	unwavering	gaze.
“You	were	plotting	murder	for	fun?	Bhima	is	your	cousin.	Both	of	you	are	equal	in
my	 eyes.	 It	 is	 good	 to	 have	 competitive	 spirit	 as	 Kshatriyas,	 but	 not	 murderous
rage.”
“Swami,	they	taunt	and	torture	us	and	my	little	sister	all	the	time.	They	are	cruel	to
the	servants.	They	are	selfish;	they	call	my	father	Andha...”
Bhishma	remained	unmoved	by	this	outburst.	“That	is	no	reason	to	attack	someone
while	hiding	in	the	dark.	If	you	are	a	Kshatriya,	be	a	man	and	fight.	Grow	up	to	be
strong	in	mind	and	body.”
Suyodhana	 stood	 silent,	 hanging	 his	 head	 in	 humiliation.	 He	 felt	 aggrieved	 with
both	Bhishma	and	Vidhura.	Did	he	not	have	the	right	to	get	even	with	Bhima?
“Listen,	 Suyodhana.”	 Bhishma’s	 voice	 had	 lost	 its	 edge	 and	 there	 was	 a	 hint	 of
kindness	 now.	 “One	 day,	 you	 will	 rule	 this	 country.	 You	 need	 to	 know	 your
enemies	 and	 your	 friends.	 I	 have	 reports	 that	 you	 are	 slipping	 in	 your	 lessons
again	 and	 keep	 daydreaming	 in	 class.	 Drona	 is	 full	 of	 complaints	 about	 your
behaviour.	 Stop	 roaming	 the	 streets,	 talking	 to	 all	 and	 sundry.	 Behave	 like	 a
Prince.	You	have	no	reason	to	go	to	the	houses	of	outcastes	and	Untouchables.	You
are	 a	 Kshatriya.	 Behave	 like	 one.	 Show	 some	 respect	 for	 the	 Brahmins	 and
learned	ones.	Stop	going	about	with	Carvaka	and	Kripa.	They	have	ideas	that	may
not	 help	 you.	 A	 King	 should	 listen	 to	 all,	 but	 not	 be	 swayed	 by	 extremes.	 Take
Drona	and	Carvaka’s	advice	with	respect	and	then	act	according	to	what	is	good
for	 the	 country	 and	 society.	 Not	 all	 things	 spoken	 are	 true.	 The	 Truth	 changes.
Wisdom	lies	in	understanding	this.	Only	then	can	you	be	a	good	ruler.”
“But	Swami,	there	is	so	much	misery	out	there.	You	have	ruled	with	wisdom;	then
why	do	so	many	people	live	like	pigs	in	our	kingdom?”
Vidhura	 almost	 lost	 his	 breath.	 Suyodhana’s	 audacity	 was	 galling.	 Even	 after	 so

many	years	of	working	with	Bhishma,	he	would	never	have	had	the	courage	to	ask
that	question.
Bhishma	 stared	 at	 Suyodhana	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 Slowly,	 a	 smile	 lit	 the	 old	 man’s
face.	 “My	 son,	 you	 will	 get	 hurt	 one	 day	 with	 such	 talk.	 You	 think	 I	 made	 this
society?	I	only	inherited	it.	I	am	doing	my	karma,	my	duty	as	a	Kshatriya,	and	that
is	to	rule	with	fairness.	I	have	no	utopian	dreams	of	changing	the	world	in	a	day.
Can	you	plant	a	sapling	and	expect	it	to	grow	into	a	tree	overnight?	You	have	to
water	 it,	 nurture	 it,	 give	 it	 sunlight,	 rain,	 and	 manure,	 and	 then	 slowly,	 it	 will
grow.	 Oppression,	 discrimination	 and	 privileges	 for	 a	 few,	 are	 as	 old	 as
civilization.	 The	 caste	 system	 was	 well	 entrenched	 centuries	 before	 my	 birth.	 I
cannot	topple	it	in	a	day,	nor	am	I	a	social	reformer.	I	merely	ensure	that	the	poor
and	those	oppressed	by	birth	do	not	suffer	even	more.	I	can	ensure	power	does	not
go	to	the	heads	of	the	elite.	Your	father	is	the	King,	but	my	tired	shoulders	have
borne	 the	 burden	 of	 rule	 for	 many	 long	 years.	 Do	 you	 think	 it	 is	 an	 easy	 job?
Ruling	is	not	what	your	father	or	your	aunt	Kunti,	think	it	is.	They	have	seen	only
the	benefits	of	power.	The	responsibilities	have	been	borne	by	me.
“When	 your	 blood	 is	 young,	 you	 dream	 impossible	 dreams	 like	 ending	 poverty
and	misery.	But	dreams	have	a	nasty	habit	of	getting	entangled	in	life	and	making	a
mess.	Right	now,	you	are	a	student	and	your	duty	is	to	learn.	Keep	dreaming	but
plant	 your	 feet	 firmly	 on	 the	 ground.	 Do	 not	 be	 swayed	 by	 Carvaka,	 Drona,	 or
Kripa.	Stay	away	from	Shakuni.	If	someone	calls	you	a	blind	man’s	son,	forgive
him.	They	say	such	things	because	they	cannot	get	even	in	any	other	way.	Take	it
as	a	compliment.	Now	go	and	attend	to	everything	Drona	teaches	you.”	With	a	curt
nod,	Bhishma	dismissed	him.
Bhishma	stood	looking	out	of	the	window.	Far	away,	across	the	green	fields	and
villages	 that	 dotted	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 river,	 he	 could	 see	 the	 faint	 outline	 of
mountains.	A	dust	storm	was	gathering	in	the	west	where	the	desert	lay;	shrouded
in	 mysteries	 and	 myth.	 Vidhura	 watched	 the	 deepening	 creases	 in	 the	 old	 man’s
forehead	 with	 concern.	 Ruling	 this	 kingdom	 was	 getting	 wearisome	 for	 both	 of
them.	 The	 petty	 squabbling	 and	 infighting,	 the	 constant	 bickering	 among	 his
nephews	and	kin,	made	them	both	sad.	The	country	was	crumbling	from	within.
Bhishma	turned	to	the	Prime	Minister	and	asked	with	a	hint	of	humour,	“Vidhura,
my	son,	why	are	you	so	glum?”

“Sir,	 Shakuni	 is	 spoiling	 the	 boys.	 If	 we	 do	 not	 send	 him	 back	 to	 Gandhara,	 he
will	destroy	our	country.”
“You	 are	 giving	 him	 too	 much	 credit.	 What	 can	 his	 puny	 little	 kingdom	 in	 the
mountains	 do	 to	 this	 mighty	 land?	 No,	 I	 am	 more	 worried	 about	 the	 internal
dangers	that	threaten	us.	We	bought	peace	with	Parashurama	at	great	cost	but	I	am
regretting	 it	 now.	 We	 did	 not	 have	 a	 choice	 then,	 did	 we?	 It	 was	 either	 that	 or
breaking	my	vow	of	celibacy	and	marrying	the	King	of	Kashi’s	eldest	daughter…
what	was	her	name?”	Bhishma’s	gaze	returned	to	the	world	outside	the	window.
Vidhura	 knew	 it	 was	 prudent	 to	 remain	 silent.	 On	 most	 days,	 the	 Regent’s
conversation	touched	upon	those	turbulent	days	of	his	life.	Bhishma	had	conquered
the	ancient	kingdom	of	Kashi	and	carried	off	the	three	beautiful	princesses,	Amba,
Ambika,	 and	 Ambalika,	 to	 Hastinapura,	 as	 brides	 for	 his	 stepbrother,
Vichitraveera.	 However,	 Amba	 was	 already	 in	 love	 with	 the	 Prince	 of	 Shalva.
When	 Bhishma	 heard	 this,	 he	 allowed	 her	 to	 return.	 But	 the	 Prince	 of	 Shalva’s
pride	 had	 been	 hurt	 when	 he	 had	 been	 compelled	 to	 fight	 Bhishma	 to	 save	 the
Princess	from	abduction	and	had	been	defeated	in	humiliating	fashion.	He	spurned
Amba	 on	 her	 return.	 She	 travelled	 back	 to	 Hastinapura	 to	 beg	 the	 celibate
Bhishma	 to	 marry	 her	 instead.	 Bound	 by	 the	 vow	 of	 celibacy	 made	 to	 his	 dead
father,	Bhishma	refused	the	Kashi	Princess.
The	story	had	been	told	many	times	by	the	Grand	Regent	and	others.	Vidhura	often
felt	 he	 had	 actually	 witnessed	 the	 incidents	 though	 they	 had	 happened	 before	 he
was	born.	Vidhura	could	visualize	the	distraught	face	of	the	dove-eyed	Princess	of
Kashi,	 begging	 the	 adamant	 Bhishma	 to	 marry	 her.	 Then,	 seeing	 that	 neither	 her
curses	nor	her	heartfelt	pleas	had	any	effect	on	the	Regent	of	the	Kurus,	she	had
left	for	her	father’s	palace,	only	to	find	herself	rejected	there	as	well.	It	was	then
that	 Parashurama’s	 spies	 found	 her	 and	 the	 plot	 to	 invade	 the	 Great	 Plains	 was
hatched	by	the	Southern	Confederate.
“I	should	not	have	agreed	to	the	truce.”	Vidhura	had	lost	count	of	the	number	of
times	he	had	heard	Bhishma’s	lament.	“The	evil	of	caste	is	spreading	its	tentacles
in	this	holy	land	and	I	am	ashamed	that	I	did	not	fight	Bhargava	Parashurama	to	the
last.	He	and	his	nasty	band	of	soldiers	have	ruined	our	country.	How	do	the	once
proud	Asuras	tolerate	him?	How	did	those	ancient	kingdoms	fall	into	the	grip	of
the	Brahmins?	The	Asuras	are	the	same	people	who	once	proclaimed	the	equality
of	all	men	under	Mahabali	and	produced	the	proud	and	brilliant	Ravana.	It	never

ceases	to	surprise	me	what	defeat	can	do	to	people.	History	is	a	bitter	teacher.	Not
even	the	great	Rama	could	have	envisaged	the	misery	he	was	inflicting	upon	the
poor	of	the	South	when	he	defeated	the	last	Asura	Empire	under	Ravana.	He	did
us	all	a	great	disservice	when	he	left	the	South	to	Vibhishana	and	the	Parashurama
clan.	Had	Rama	ruled	directly,	perhaps	he	could	have	stemmed	the	evil.	Just	see
what	centuries	of	subjugation	have	brought	them	to	now.”
Vidhura	 averted	 his	 eyes.	 He	 wanted	 to	 comment	 that	 it	 was	 no	 better	 here	 in
Hastinapura.	 He	 still	 smarted	 from	 the	 insult	 Guru	 Drona	 had	 meted	 out	 to	 him
when	he	had	recommended	the	son	of	the	charioteer.
Bhishma	looked	into	his	Prime	Minister’s	eyes	and	smiled.	“I	know	what	you	are
thinking.	 That	 it	 is	 as	 bad	 here	 as	 there.	 But	 you	 have	 not	 seen	 the	 world.	 I	 am
sorry	I	have	to	say	this	to	make	my	point.	You	are	my	nephew,	but	still	you	are	a
Shudra,	 since	 your	 mother	 was	 a	 house	 cleaner.	 Here	 you	 are	 taunted	 for	 your
caste,	irrespective	of	your	talent	and	knowledge.	Kunti	and	her	Brahmin	advisers
resent	you.	So	you	think	life	is	tough	for	you.	Ha...	had	you	been	in	one	of	those
kingdoms	 where	 Parashurama’s	 writ	 rules,	 you	 would	 be	 living	 far	 from	 the
capital	city,	untouchable,	unapproachable,	illiterate,	ignorant,	and	no	better	than	a
pig.	That	is	caste	for	you;	not	suffering	these	little	taunts	from	jealous	people.	If
my	 capital	 were	 Muzaris	 or	 Madurai,	 instead	 of	 Hastinapura,	 I	 would	 now	 be
washing	 my	 palace	 with	 cow	 dung	 and	 urine	 to	 cleanse	 the	 ground	 polluted	 by
your	footsteps.	Parashurama	and	his	followers	are	unhappy	we	do	not	follow	their
version	of	the	scriptures	and	impose	such	laws	on	our	people.”
Vidhura	flushed	at	the	Grand	Regent’s	words.	It	was	embarrassing	to	be	reminded
of	his	origins.	Had	he	not	worked	hard	to	learn	the	scriptures,	the	Upanishads,	the
sciences	of	mathematics,	astronomy,	astrology,	as	well	as	music	–	all	that	could	be
learnt?	Had	he	not	served	his	motherland	with	devotion	and	dedication?	Was	he
not	 loyal	 to	 the	 proud	 man	 before	 him?	 Even	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 of	 the	 Kurus
bestowed	 his	 kindness	 as	 a	 favour	 to	 a	 poor	 Shudra	 boy.	 His	 talent	 and
intelligence	 did	 not	 count.	 Perhaps	 his	 presence	 helped	 Bhishma	 feel
broadminded.	Vidhura	thought	he	was	like	a	prize	dog	–	intelligent	and	handsome,
but	a	dog	nevertheless.	At	such	times,	Vidhura	hated	his	job	and	his	master	with
equal	loathing.
“The	war	we	waged	with	the	Southern	Confederate	under	Bhargava	Parashurama
was	 not	 about	 my	 rejection	 of	 the	 Princess	 of	 Kashi,	 though	 that	 rascal	 cleverly

used	the	issue	as	propaganda.	Parashurama	neutralized	our	allies	using	the	issue.
We	had	to	fight	in	the	treacherous	jungles	of	the	Vindhyas.	I	shudder	to	think	how
cheaply	 human	 life	 was	 lost	 there.	 The	 brutal	 pogrom	 Parashurama	 unleashed
claimed	 the	 lives	 of	 so	 many	 Nagas,	 Nishadas,	 Kiratas	 and	 Vanaras,	 who	 had
lived	peacefully	in	those	jungles	from	time	immemorial.	They	were	expendable	as
they	 belonged	 to	 untouchable,	 unapproachable,	 dirty	 and	 polluted	 castes.	 What
choice	did	I	have?	He	would	have	exterminated	them	all.	There	was	no	alternative
but	to	agree	to	his	conditions.	I	had	no	choice...”
A	sandstorm	was	gathering	on	the	far	horizon.	Vidhura	could	feel	it	in	the	air.	‘You
could	have	married	Amba	and	called	Parashurama’s	bluff,’	he	thought,	but	did	not
dare	say	it.
“I	could	never	have	married	that	girl.	I	earned	the	name	Bhishma	only	after	taking
my	oath	of	celibacy.	Else,	I	would	have	been	a	mere	Gangadatta.	I	owe	everything
to	 my	 brahmacharya.	 No,	 I	 did	 not	 have	 a	 choice.	 The	 truce	 was	 made	 and	 I
allowed	 Parashurama’s	 schools	 of	 learning	 and	 his	 guild	 of	 Brahmins	 into	 our
kingdom.	And	see	where	we	are	now.	Caste	practices	that	had	been	fading	made	a
great	 comeback.	 You	 know,	 there	 were	 murmurs	 when	 my	 father	 married	 a
fisherwoman,	but	nobody	ran	around	calling	her	names.	Not	that	she	would	have
tolerated	 such	 nonsense.	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 any	 woman	 as	 strong	 willed	 as	 my
stepmother	Satyavathi.	She	was	a	great	lady.	It	might	shock	Parashurama,	but	the
fact	is	that	the	entire	Kuru	race	originated	in	the	womb	of	a	fisherwoman.	A	King
marrying	 a	 mere	 fisherman’s	 daughter!	 Can	 we	 imagine	 that	 now?	 Times	 have
changed	 for	 the	 worse	 and	 I	 played	 a	 part	 in	 it.	 That	 is	 what	 grieves	 me	 every
day.”
A	 dry	 breeze	 ruffled	 the	 silk	 curtains	 and	 carried	 some	 fine	 desert	 dust	 into	 the
room.	The	sounds	of	boys	playing	filtered	into	the	room	from	the	gardens	below.
“Maybe	 I	 should	 have	 sacrificed	 a	 few	 more	 Nishada	 and	 Naga	 lives	 and
continued	the	war.	But	I	thought	I	was	supporting	the	cause	of	the	poor	and	that	a
truce	would	end	the	misery	of	the	tribes	who	lived	on	the	fringes	of	our	kingdom.	I
wanted	Bhargava	to	take	his	warrior	hoards	back	and	leave	us	in	peace.	I	thought	I
was	saving	the	tribes	from	total	annihilation	at	the	hands	of	Parashurama’s	army.
After	the	truce,	Bhargava	was	true	to	his	word	and	went	back	to	his	kingdom	on
the	 southwestern	 coast	 but	 he	 left	 a	 legacy	 of	 bitterness	 that	 still	 haunts	 us.	 He
gave	birth	to	the	evil	called	Takshaka.”

Takshaka’s	 name	 dragged	 Vidhura	 back	 from	 his	 own	 stream	 of	 thought.	 “The
attack	by	Takshaka...	I	have	my	suspicions.	I	think	I	know	who	helped	him	into	the
fort	that	night,	Sir.”
But	 Bhishma	 continued	 to	 stand	 at	 the	 window,	 staring	 towards	 the	 faraway
mountains	and	the	river	snaking	through	the	wheat	fields.	The	sun	was	descending
into	 the	 western	 horizon.	 As	 happened	 all	 too	 often,	 Vidhura	 had	 missed	 lunch.
Work	 pressure	 was	 mounting	 day	 by	 day	 and	 there	 was	 no	 respite	 from	 the
responsibilities	Bhishma	piled	on	him.	“I	think	it	was	Prince	Shakuni	who	aided
Takshaka	in	that	daredevil	night	raid.”
Bhishma	 turned	 towards	 him.	 “What	 makes	 you	 think	 so?	 Shakuni?	 That	 noaccount?	I	cannot	believe	it.”
Vidhura	did	not	have	proof	for	now	and	cursed	himself	for	having	blurted	out	the
name,	 knowing	 the	 tongue-lashing	 that	 would	 inevitably	 follow.	 “I	 saw	 him
praying	 facing	 West.”	 Vidhura	 stopped,	 flinching	 at	 Bhishma’s	 look	 of
astonishment.
“You	saw	Shakuni	pray	facing	West	and	concluded	he	is	a	traitor?	So	the	mark	of
patriotism	is	to	pray	facing	East?	A	traitor	is	someone	who	prays	facing	West?	Is
this	 your	 theory?	 This	 is	 a	 free	 country	 and	 people	 can	 pray	 facing	 in	 any
direction.	 Some	 even	 do	 so	 upside	 down,	 like	 the	 naked	 sadhus	 or	 some	 of	 the
Aghoris.	 Others	 choose	 not	 to	 pray	 at	 all,	 like	 Carvaka.	 Do	 you	 consider	 them
traitors	as	well?	I	expected	a	little	more	logic	from	you,	Vidhura.”
“It	is	not	just	that.	I	saw	him	help	a	fallen	Naga	soldier	that	night	and	did	not	like
the	expression	on	his	face.”	Vidhura	saw	amusement	in	the	old	man’s	face.	All	his
insecurities	 raised	 their	 heads	 like	 a	 many-hooded	 cobra.	 He	 cursed	 himself	 for
making	a	fool	of	himself.	“I	have	a	hunch	he	was	behind	it.”
Bhishma	 moved	 towards	 his	 loyal	 subordinate	 and	 put	 an	 arm	 around	 his
shoulders.	 “Vidhura,	 my	 boy,	 I	 think	 you	 really	 need	 a	 break.	 You	 have	 started
hallucinating.	 Have	 you	 ever	 tried	 to	 understand	 who	 Takshaka	 is	 and	 what	 he
stands	for?”
“He	is	a	terrorist.”

“They	use	terror,	but	they	are	not	terrorists.	The	rebellion	led	by	the	Nagas	is	a
reaction	 to	 our	 failure	 to	 protect	 the	 weak	 and	 downtrodden.	 Takshaka	 is	 a
creation	 of	 that	 failure.	 The	 State’s	 duty	 is	 to	 protect	 the	 weak	 from	 being
oppressed	by	the	strong.	When	the	State	fails	to	do	so,	the	weak	will	rebel.	In	a
way,	the	truce	I	made	with	Parashurama	led	inevitably	to	the	rise	of	Takshaka.	He
is	the	mirror	opposite	of	Parashurama.”
“Swami...	that	does	not...”
“That	 does	 not	 sound	 right,	 Vidhura?	 Think!	 What	 does	 Parashurama	 want?
Complete	 Brahmin	 hegemony	 and	 his	 interpretation	 of	 our	 holy	 scriptures	 to
prevail.	He	wants	to	be	the	absolute	power	centre.	Parashurama’s	clan	has	been
waging	 war	 against	 all	 other	 castes,	 and	 the	 Kshatriyas	 in	 particular,	 for	 a
thousand	years,	to	establish	a	perfect	kingdom	for	the	Brahmins.	All	of	South	India
resented	 the	 evil	 of	 caste.	 But	 now	 it	 is	 more	 entrenched	 there	 than	 in	 the	 great
plains	of	the	North	where	it	originated.	Due	to	the	enlightened	rule	of	my	father,
Shantanu,	and	my	stepmother,	Satyavathi,	and	the	efforts	of	sages	like	Vyasa,	our
kingdom	 has	 slowly	 been	 getting	 back	 its	 humane	 face.	 Whereas	 in
Dakshinajanapada,	things	have	gone	from	bad	to	worse.	Countries	wax	and	wane
in	culture,	enlightenment,	thought	and	prosperity.	Parashurama	has	ruined	the	great
kingdoms	of	the	South	and	now	they	are	 mere	backwaters	compared	to	our	own
kingdom.”
“But	what	has	that	to	do	with	the	rise	of	Takshaka	and	his	warriors?”
“Takshaka	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 Naga	 Parashurama.	 He	 too,	 wants	 a	 perfect	 world
where	 the	 oppressed	 becomes	 the	 oppressor.	 All	 his	 talk	 about	 equality	 is	 mere
eyewash.	 If	 he	 wins,	 he	 will	 be	 just	 another	 tyrant,	 like	 Parashurama.	 Then	 the
hunted	 will	 be	 the	 Brahmins,	 Kshatriyas	 and	 Vaishyas,	 and	 even	 other	 Shudras,
who	the	Nagas	think	are	not	downtrodden	enough.	In	fact,	it	will	be	far	worse	than
Parashurama	taking	over,	since	not	all	Brahmins	accept	his	narrow	ideology.	The
likes	of	Kripa	and	Carvaka	among	the	Brahmins,	may	rebel	and	die	as	martyrs	if
Parashurama	succeeds.	In	the	case	of	Takshaka,	no	such	opposition	exists,	except
for	the	might	of	Hastinapura.	It	is	easier	to	fool	and	brainwash	a	poor	Nishada	or
Naga,	 who	 has	 barely	 anything	 to	 eat	 and	 almost	 nothing	 to	 lose,	 by	 offering	 a
brave	new	world.	It	is	easy	to	get	such	people	to	die	for	his	cause,	because	the
people	Takshaka	has	chosen	as	his	tools,	are	those	we	abandoned	to	starve	long
ago.	We	have	appropriated	their	farmlands,	driven	them	away	from	their	forests,

and	chased	them	out	of	our	royal	footpaths,	so	now	they	have	nowhere	to	go	but
into	 the	 embrace	 of	 the	 Naga	 leader.	 Since	 none	 of	 our	 Brahmin	 teachers	 is
prepared	 to	 instruct	 anyone	 other	 than	 Brahmins	 or	 Kshatriyas,	 we	 are	 creating
legions	 of	 illiterate	 and	 ignorant	 folk	 who	 will	 be	 ready	 to	 die	 for	 Takshaka’s
cause.	When	our	schools	fail	to	teach	our	children	what	they	should	know,	other
schools	 take	 their	 place	 and	 teach	 different	 lessons,	 which	 we	 may	 not	 like.	 We
are	building	our	own	funeral	pyre.”
Vidhura	 stood	 silent,	 thinking	 that	 the	 kind	 of	 education	 he	 himself	 had	 received
would	now	be	impossible	for	any	Shudra	boy.	Things	had	changed	so	much	for	the
worse	in	this	land.	No	one	with	the	baggage	of	low	caste,	like	him,	could	aspire	to
be	 even	 a	 clerk	 in	 government	 service,	 let	 alone	 the	 Prime	 Minister	 of
Hastinapura.	Merit	no	longer	counted.	Every	position	was	based	on	caste.
“What	happened	to	that	brave	boy,	Vidhura?”
Vidhura’s	anger	and	resentment	flooded	back	as	Bhishma	reminded	him	of	Karna.
He	 still	 smarted	 from	 Drona’s	 insult.	 “The	 Guru	 refused	 him,	 saying	 he	 was	 a
Suta,	not	Brahmin	or	Kshatriya.”
“That	I	know,	but	I	have	also	heard	he	is	now	studying	under	Kripa.”
“Yes,	but	I	do	not	think	Kripa	is	teaching	the	boy	about	arms.”
“Yes,	 that	 is	 what	 appears	 strange.	 I	 cannot	 understand	 that	 Brahmin.	 Why	 is	 he
teaching	Karna	rituals	that	only	a	Brahmin	should	know?	The	country	will	lose	a
great	 warrior	 if	 the	 boy	 becomes	 a	 Priest.	 Given	 his	 origins,	 I	 do	 not	 think	 any
temple	will	give	him	a	job.	They	will	not	allow	him	anywhere	near.	So	what	is
Kripa	doing?”
“Swami,	if	you	could	speak	to	Guru	Drona…”
“Vidhura,	 the	 Guru	 is	 adamant.	 I	 do	 not	 want	 a	 situation	 where	 he	 disobeys	 my
orders.	He	is	a	great	teacher	and	warrior.	If	he	disobeys	me,	I	will	have	to	sack
him	 and	 he	 might	 end	 up	 with	 one	 of	 our	 enemy	 kingdoms.	 He	 is	 a	 disciple	 of
Parashurama	and	if	he	goes	back	to	him,	it	will	be	disastrous	for	us.	I	will	bet	on	a
seasoned	 warrior	 like	 Drona	 over	 an	 untrained	 boy	 like	 Karna.	 So	 many	 boys
show	early	promise	and	then	turn	out	to	be	nobodies.	Why	should	we	take	the	risk

of	losing	Drona?	It	is	unfortunate	that	in	our	system	there	is	no	place	for	people
like	Karna.	But	when	is	life	fair?”
‘This	 conversation	 is	 going	 nowhere,’	 thought	 Vidhura.	 ‘Everyone	 toes	 the	 line
eventually.’	Even	Bhishma,	whom	he	respected,	was	conservative	within.	He	did
not	 dare	 challenge	 the	 Brahmin	 Guru	 openly	 and	 risk	 a	 riot.	 Perhaps	 there	 was
practical	wisdom	in	avoiding	open	confrontation	but	it	still	hurt.
“What	should	I	do	about	Shakuni?”
“Watch	 him.	 Nobody	 is	 above	 suspicion,	 including	 you	 and	 me.	 The	 mind	 is	 a
dangerous	thing	and	can	change	at	any	time.	Keep	a	close	watch	on	Shakuni,	and
on	 Kripa	 and	 Karna.	 Learn	 what	 mischief	 that	 imperious	 Brahmin	 is	 up	 to.	 One
day,	I	am	going	to	lock	him	and	his	friend	Carvaka	up	as	mad	men.	Irritating	the
Priests	 by	 teaching	 a	 Suta	 boy	 the	 Gayatri	mantra!	 If	 he	 wants	 to	 do	 that,	 why
need	he	do	it	in	full	view	of	the	Priests?	I	will	now	have	to	expend	a	great	deal	of
time	 talking	 to	 Kunti,	 who	 will	 keep	 appearing	 with	 her	 sycophants	 every	 other
day,	to	complain	about	Kripa.”
Vidhura	 bowed	 and	 turned	 to	 leave,	 when	 Bhishma’s	 voice	 stopped	 him.
“Amba…	ah,	I	remember	her	name	now...	Amba...	the	poor	girl	was	sacrificed	to
Parashurama’s	beliefs	and	my	vow.	She	took	refuge	in	Panchala	and	died	there	in
misery.	It	was	so	sad.	I	wonder	how	her	son	is	doing.”
Vidhura	remained	silent.	He	found	it	hard	to	suppress	an	ironic	smile	that	Bhishma
had	 finally	 remembered	 the	 Kashi	 Princess’s	 name.	 He	 had	 heard	 the	 tale	 many
times	before	and	had	learnt	to	stand	by	quietly,	with	a	blank	face,	while	Bhishma
closed	his	eyes,	lost	in	his	own	world.	Vidhura	bowed	and	took	his	leave.	He	was
feeling	hungry	and	walked	towards	his	chamber	where	the	cooks	would	have	sent
his	 food	 separately.	 He	 remembered	 he	 had	 forgotten	 to	 warn	 Bhishma	 about
another	 threat	 looming	 ahead.	 His	 spies	 had	 informed	 him	 that	 the	 son	 of	 the
spurned	 Amba	 was	 growing	 up	 fast	 and	 developing	 into	 a	 formidable	 warrior.
Amba	had	eventually	committed	suicide	after	struggling	with	depression	for	many
years.	But	she	had	filled	her	son’s	mind	with	hatred	against	Bhishma.	Amba	had
taken	refuge	in	the	palace	of	King	Dhrupada	of	Panchala	and	given	birth	to	her	son
there.	 In	 the	 truce,	 when	 great	 men	 like	 Parashurama	 and	 Bhishma	 traded
concessions,	 having	 sacrificed	 thousands	 of	 lives,	 the	 woman	 who	 had	 been	 the
ostensible	cause	of	the	war,	was	conveniently	forgotten.	Parashurama	got	what	he

wanted	 and	 Bhishma	 avoided	 breaking	 his	 vow	 of	 celibacy	 by	 not	 marrying	 the
Princess	who	was	later	found	to	have	been	made	pregnant	by	her	lover.	She	spent
a	miserable	decade	at	Panchala,	cursing	Bhishma	and	her	fate.	When	she	finally
ended	 her	 life	 by	 jumping	 over	 the	 balustrade	 of	 the	 staircase	 and	 falling	 to	 the
cold	 marble	 lobby	 where	 fountains	 rose	 in	 rainbow	 arcs,	 her	 son	 decided	 to
extract	revenge	for	her	life	and	death.
It	 was	 not	 another	 enemy	 being	 added	 to	 Bhishma’s	 long	 list	 of	 foes,	 which
worried	the	Prime	Minister.	It	was	the	fact	that	the	son	who	had	been	adopted	by
King	Dhrupada	of	Panchala	and	been	bought	up	as	a	Prince,	was	no	son	at	all.	He
was	a	eunuch	named	Shikandi,	and	he	had	vowed	to	be	the	death	of	Bhishma	one
day.	 There	 could	 be	 no	 greater	 insult	 to	 the	 illustrious	 Commander	 of	 the	 Kuru
armies	than	to	be	challenged	by	a	eunuch.	Vidhura	did	not	know	how	to	break	the
news	to	the	great	warrior.

7	THE	LESSON
SUYODHANA	 WAS	 WATCHING	 DRONA,	fear	and	anger	battling	for	supremacy	within.

He	 hated	 these	 classes	 and	 wanted	 to	 be	 out	 in	 the	 forest,	 roaming	 about	 and
watching	 the	 birds	 and	 butterflies.	 Every	 day	 of	 the	 past	 four	 years	 had	 been
torture.	 His	 enduring	 memory	 was	 of	 sitting	 glassy-eyed,	 feeling	 like	 an	 idiot,
while	 Drona	 heaped	 abuse	 upon	 him.	 Initially,	 Suyodhana	 had	 asked	 his	 teacher
about	 various	 things.	 Kripa,	 who	 had	 instructed	 the	 Princes	 before	 Drona,	 had
always	been	ready	to	answer	any	question	with	a	smile.	But	everything	changed
when	Drona	came.
The	 best	 times	 were	 when	 the	 travelling	 ascetic,	 Carvaka,	 visited	 Kripa.	 The
evenings	spent	with	them	were	magical.	Suyodhana	and	Aswathama	would	sit	in
rapt	attention,	enjoying	the	wit	and	banter	of	the	two	men	who	constantly	argued	in
a	friendly	manner	while	the	river	flowed	swiftly	behind	them.	Crows	returning	to
roost	would	fill	the	trees	above.	Men	and	women	would	be	hurrying	back	from	the
day’s	work,	some	leading	cattle,	some	with	baskets	balanced	on	their	heads,	while
others	 rode	 bullock	 carts	 towards	 their	 villages.	 Devotees	 would	 be	 walking	 to
the	temple,	where	the	Priests	would	be	chanting	mantras	and	praising	the	Gods.
Beggars	 would	 be	 waiting	 at	 the	 temple	 steps,	 acting	 more	 miserable	 than	 they
were	to	coax	alms	from	the	devotees	who	had	brought	offerings	for	the	Gods	and
Priests.	 Vendors	 of	 jasmine,	 sweets	 and	 boiled	 nuts,	 would	 weave	 through	 the
milling	crowds,	selling	their	wares.	Life	did	not	care	about	the	theories	the	two
Gurus	 were	 bickering	 about.	 Life	 moved	 on,	 irrespective	 of	 philosophy,	 despite
the	Gods	and	the	thoughts	of	men.	But	that	did	not	take	away	from	the	enjoyment
the	 boys	 felt	 on	 listening	 to	 the	 old	 masters	 argue	 with	 each	 other.	 Suyodhana,
Aswathama,	 and	 even	 the	 less	 intelligent	 Sushasana,	 learnt	 more	 from	 such
wonderful	evenings	than	from	Drona’s	many	classes.
***

A	whack	on	the	head	rudely	jolted	Suyodhana	out	of	his	reverie.	His	classmates’
laughter	scorched	his	ears.
“So	you	oaf,	what	is	the	answer?”	Drona	barked.

Suyodhana	 had	 not	 even	 heard	 the	 question.	 He	 looked	 helplessly	 at	 his	 friend,
Aswathama.	But	the	boy	did	not	meet	the	Prince’s	pleading	eyes.	He	sat	with	his
gaze	 fixed	 on	 the	 ground.	 For	 a	 moment,	 Suyodhana	 thought	 his	 friend	 was
ashamed	of	his	father’s	behaviour.	Then	he	saw	his	lips	pressed	together,	trying	to
suppress	his	mirth.	What	was	so	funny?	“I	did	not	hear	the	question,	Swami.”	This
evoked	more	laughter.
“I	know	you	are	dumb	and	like	your	father,	blind	to	right	and	wrong.	But	are	you
deaf	as	well?”	Drona	smiled	but	the	Guru’s	eyes	betrayed	the	malice	he	felt.	More
laughter	followed	as	Suyodhana	stood	alone,	stung	by	the	insults	and	hurt	by	the
unfairness	of	it	all.
“You	keep	hanging	around	those	good-for-nothing	Brahmins,	Kripa	and	Carvaka.
You	 make	 fun	 of	 the	 Priests	 and	 spend	 your	 time	 under	 the	 Banyan	 tree	 those
rascals	 have	 made	 their	 den.	 You	 have	 spoilt	 my	 son	 too.	 You	 roam	 the	 streets
without	 caring	 for	 the	 taboos	 or	 about	 pollution;	 touching	 everyone,	 eating	 with
Shudras	and	playing	with	children	from	the	slums.	Do	you	know	that	your	friend
Kripa	is	teaching	that	son	of	a	Suta	to	be	a	Brahmin?	Rama…	Rama…	I	think	the
Kali	Yuga	is	near.	Sutas	learning	the	Gayatri	and	Shudras	studying	to	be	literate!
People	like	Kripa	and	Carvaka,	who	were	fortunate	enough	to	be	born	Brahmins,
are	throwing	away	their	good	karma	by	teaching	everyone	to	read	the	Vedas.	What
is	 the	 world	 coming	 to?	 And	 you,	 Prince	 Suyodhana…	 no,	 I	 should	 call	 you
Duryodhana,	 for	 that	 is	 what	 you	 are	 –	 one	 who	 does	 not	 know	 how	 to	 handle
arms,	is	clumsy-footed,	a	nitwit…	You	bring	only	shame	on	your	ancient	line	and
on	Hastinapura,	Prince.”
An	 awed	hush	followed	these	words.	But	Suyodhana	looked	 straight	back	at	his
Guru.	“Swami,	I	do	not	find	any	reason	to	be	ashamed.	I	have	done	what	my	heart
says.”
“Duryodhana,	if	everyone	did	only	what	he	pleased,	society	would	soon	collapse.
That	is	why	there	are	rules.	That	is	why	taboos	exist.	It	is	what	the	scriptures	have
ordained.	It	is	our	dharma.”	Drona	walked	up	and	down,	delivering	the	speech	he
had	rehearsed	a	hundred	times	in	his	mind.
Suyodhana’s	 heart	 sank.	 He	 resented	 the	 vicious	 nickname	 that	 many	 relished
calling	 the	 sons	 of	 Dhritarashtra.	 Though	 the	 Princes’	 names	 all	 started	 with	 the
auspicious	prefix	Su,	they	were	referred	to	with	the	inauspicious	prefix	Du	behind

their	backs,	right	from	their	childhood.	Suyodhana	became	Duryodhana,	Sushasana
was	 Dushasana,	 Sushala	 was	 called	 Dushala,	 and	 so	 on.	 The	 Guru’s	 taunts	 had
ensured	the	inauspicious	names	became	fixtures.
“Do	I	have	to	wait	till	the	end	of	the	world	to	get	an	answer	from	you?	Can	anyone
else	 answer?”	 Drona	 turned	 towards	 the	 Pandavas,	 who	 eagerly	 raised	 their
hands.
“You,	Yudhishtra,	my	son,	what	is	the	answer?”
Yudhishtra	began	quoting	from	the	scriptures	with	consummate	ease	while	Drona
listened	 raptly.	 Suyodhana	 heard	 nothing.	 He	 was	 sick	 of	 always	 being	 on	 the
receiving	 end	 of	 Drona’s	 ire.	 He	 wanted	 to	 be	 out	 there	 listening	 to	 Kripa	 and
Carvaka.	He	longed	for	the	throbbing	life	of	the	streets.	What	use	had	he	for	these
long-forgotten	chants	and	useless	rituals?
The	class	stood	up	and	moved	from	the	clearing	towards	the	jungle.	Aswathama
tugged	 at	 Suyodhana’s	 hand	 but	 Suyodhana	 only	 glared	 at	 him.	 He	 had	 not
forgotten	the	stifled	laughter	of	the	Guru’s	son	when	his	father	was	insulting	him.
“Hey,	 please	 forget	 it	 Suyodhana.	 I	 did	 not	 mean	 it.”	 Aswathama	 tried	 to	 put	 a
hand	on	the	Prince’s	shoulder,	but	Suyodhana	shrugged	it	off	and	walked	on.
Drona	was	walking	quickly	towards	the	forest	with	the	Pandavas	enthusiastically
following	him.	Suyodhana	searched	for	Sushasana,	but	could	not	find	him	amongst
the	screaming	and	running	boys.	Dust	swirled	everywhere	and	the	sun	was	getting
hotter.
“My	father	is	not	as	bad	as	you	think,”	said	Aswathama	from	behind	him.
“As	 if	 I	 care.”	 Suyodhana	 walked	 faster,	 trying	 to	 escape	 the	 Guru’s	 son	 but	 he
knew	 he	 was	 incapable	 of	 holding	 a	 grudge	 against	 his	 best	 friend.	 His	 only
friend.	Suyodhana	stopped	abruptly.	“What	is	the	Guru	up	to?”	He	could	feel	the
tension	easing	out	of	Aswathama	who	came	to	stand	beside	him.
“It	could	be	one	of	his	practical	lessons.”	The	two	boys	looked	at	each	other	in
dismay.	They	dreaded	such	lessons	as	there	would	be	constant	comparisons	with
the	Pandavas.	Arjuna	was	developing	into	an	ace	archer.	However	hard	they	tried,
no	other	student	could	match	his	skill.	Drona,	who	was	stingy	in	praising	his	son,

was	effusive	when	it	came	to	Arjuna.
By	the	time	Suyodhana	and	Aswathama	got	to	them,	the	other	boys	were	already
seated	on	the	ground	and	the	Guru	was	preparing	a	new	test.	The	boys’	chattering
and	 the	 afternoon	 heat	 made	 Suyodhana	 feel	 drained	 but	 there	 was	 no	 escaping
until	the	lesson	ended.	He	looked	around	and	saw	something	move	in	the	jungle.
The	bush	on	the	far	side	of	the	clearing	shook	in	an	unnatural	way.	The	trembling
of	 the	 leaves	 did	 not	 follow	 the	 flow	 of	 the	 breeze.	 He	 stared	 for	 a	 long	 time,
waiting	 for	 whatever	 was	 hiding	 behind	 the	 bush	 to	 move	 again.	 Dragonflies
buzzed	around,	alighting	on	the	grass	and	then	scurrying	away	in	alarm.	Another
movement	caught	Suyodhana’s	eye.	Was	it	a	Naga	warrior	hiding	there,	waiting	to
ambush	 them?	 Aswathama	 whispered	 to	 Suyodhana	 to	 pay	 attention	 to	 what	 his
father	was	doing	and	the	Prince	tore	his	gaze	away	from	the	bush.
The	 Guru	 was	 standing	 inside	 a	 small	 circle	 he	 had	 drawn.	 “Silence!”	 Drona
raised	 his	 hands.	 The	 hum	 of	 voices	 died	 away.	 “I	 am	 going	 to	 conduct	 an
important	test	today.	Who	will	volunteer?”
Nobody	 moved.	 All	 the	 boys	 suddenly	 found	 the	 ground	 below	 their	 feet	 very
interesting	and	sat	with	their	eyes	fixed	downwards.
“No	one...	no	one	volunteers	to	go	first.	Fine,	then	I	will	have	to	pick.”	Drona’s
eyes	 scanned	 the	 class.	 Every	 boy	 prayed	 the	 Guru	 would	 spare	 him.
“Aswathama.”	 There	 was	 a	 collective	 sigh	 of	 relief	 as	 the	 nervous	 Aswathama
stood	up.	“Come	here	and	stand	in	this	circle.	Do	not	forget	to	bring	your	bow	and
arrows.”
Suyodhana	 nodded	 reassuringly	 as	 Aswathama	 slowly	 picked	 up	 his	 bow	 and
quiver	and	walked	into	the	circle	drawn	by	his	father.
“Look	there,”	Drona	said,	pointing	to	a	distant	mango	tree.	“What	do	you	see?”
Was	there	a	catch?	Aswathama’s	heart	thumped	in	his	ribcage.	What	was	there	to
see	other	than	a	mango	tree?
“It	is	a	mango	tree.”
“If	you	befriend	a	blind	man’s	son,	what	else	will	you	see?	Get	back	to	your	seat.”

Aswathama	sat	down,	trying	not	to	look	at	Suyodhana.
Suyodhana	 was	 burning	 with	 anger.	 Why	 did	 the	 Guru	 drag	 his	 blind	 father	 into
everything?	Was	it	his	fault	that	he	was	blind?	Was	it	not	Lord	Shiva’s	will?	Now
what	was	the	Guru	pointing	at?	Had	he	seen	the	bush	that	was	possibly	hiding	a
Naga	 warrior?	 Suyodhana	 tried	 to	 concentrate	 on	 the	 mango	 tree.	 What	 was	 so
special	about	it?
“Bhima.”
The	 enormous	 Pandava	 walked	 with	 his	 characteristic	 elephantine	 gait	 to	 reach
the	circle.	Drona	raised	an	eyebrow	in	question.
“I	see	a	few	ripe	mangoes	in	the	tree,”	Bhima	said.	The	boys	laughed	aloud.
“My	 little	 Prince	 is	 hungry	 I	 believe.”	 Bhima	 blushed	 like	 a	 coy	 bride	 at	 the
Guru’s	words.	“Please	take	your	place,	my	son.”
Suyodhana	tried	hard	to	see	what	was	so	special	about	the	mango	tree,	as	one	by
one,	all	his	cousins	and	brothers	were	called.	No	one	was	able	to	answer	to	the
Guru’s	satisfaction.	Finally,	Suyodhana	heard	Drona	call	his	name.	He	stood	and
walked	towards	the	circle.	As	he	neared,	he	saw	them	–	two	parrots	sitting	on	the
topmost	branch	of	the	tree.	It	was	spring	and	love	was	in	the	air.	Lost	in	their	lust
and	 love,	 the	 birds	 were	 oblivious	 to	 the	 danger	 that	 awaited	 them.	 As	 he	 saw
them,	the	horror	of	what	the	Guru	was	asking	struck	Suyodhana.
“What	do	you	see	there?”
“I	see	love.”
“What	are	you?	A	poet?	Draw	your	bow	and	tell	me	what	you	see	there.”
“Swami,	 I	 see	 life.	 I	 see	 two	 souls,	 united	 in	 love.	 I	 see	 bliss	 in	 their	 eyes	 and
hear	 celebration	 in	 their	 voices.	 I	 see	 the	 blue	 sky	 spread	 like	 a	 canopy	 above
them.	 I	 feel	 the	 breeze	 that	 ruffles	 their	 feathers.	 I	 smell	 the	 fragrance	 of	 ripe
mangoes…”
Smack!	 Suyodhana	 felt	 his	 cheek	 burn.	 He	 staggered	 and	 almost	 fell.	 It	 took	 a
moment	for	him	to	realise	Drona	had	struck	him.	“You	fool!	You	good-for-nothing

rascal!	Are	you	making	fun	of	me?	You	think,	because	you	are	a	Prince,	you	can
taunt	a	poor	Brahmin?	I	am	trying	to	make	you	into	a	warrior	and	you	talk	like	a
woman.	Get	out	of	my	sight!”
Suyodhana	walked	back	with	his	head	hung	in	shame.	The	unkind	words	stung.	He
had	intended	no	insult	to	his	teacher.
“A	woman!”	Bhima	called	out,	and	all	the	boys	laughed.
Suyodhana	 wanted	 to	 take	 on	 fatso,	 but	 before	 he	 could	 move,	 Drona	 called	 the
last	boy.	“Arjuna.”
The	middle	Pandava	Prince	stood	up	and	walked	to	the	centre.	Drona	beamed	at
his	favourite	student	as	Arjuna	touched	his	Guru’s	feet	before	entering	the	circle.
Sushasana	 muttered	 a	 curse	 and	 a	 few	 boys	 from	 the	 Kaurava	 camp	 snickered.
Drona	 glared	 at	 them	 and	 silence	 descended.	 He	 turned	 to	 Arjuna,	 who	 was
standing	 with	 his	 bowstring	 taut.	 The	 setting	 sun	 kissed	 the	 tip	 of	 his	 arrow,
making	it	glow	blood	red.	“Tell	me,	son.	What	do	you	see	there?”
“I	see	the	eye	of	a	bird,	which	is	my	target.”
“Sabash!	Bravo	my	son.	Shoot!”
“No...”	 Suyodhana	 shouted,	 but	 Arjuna’s	 arrow	 was	 swift.	 It	 pierced	 the	 bird’s
eye	and	brain	and	lifted	the	little	body	a	few	feet	into	the	air	before	plunging	to	the
ground	with	its	impaled	prey.
The	Pandavas	clapped	at	this	impressive	feat	of	archery.	Drona	shed	tears	of	joy
and	hugged	his	favourite	pupil.	The	distressed	cries	of	the	dead	bird’s	mate	filled
the	sky.	It	circled	the	tree	over	and	over	again	and	then	dropped	down	beside	its
fallen	love.	It	screeched	in	an	agony	of	loss;	tapping	its	dead	mate	with	its	beak.
But	there	were	no	eyes	to	see	the	bird’s	misery,	other	than	that	of	a	blind	man’s
son.	 Drona	 made	 a	 speech	 praising	 Arjuna’s	 marksmanship,	 his	 dedication,	 and
his	 eye	 for	 seeing	 only	 the	 target.	 He	 said	 that	 the	 most	 important	 qualities	 of	 a
warrior	 were	 unflinching	 aim,	 the	 determination	 to	 achieve	 victory	 at	 any	 cost,
and	seeing	only	what	was	essential.	The	dharma	of	a	warrior	was	to	shoot	where
his	superiors	told	him	to,	not	to	question	why.
Suyodhana	heard	none	of	it.	He	walked	towards	the	fallen	bird,	ignoring	the	angry

calls	from	his	Guru.	As	he	neared,	the	bird’s	mate	looked	at	him	suspiciously	and
screeched,	perhaps	cursing	him.	Suyodhana	could	not	control	his	tears.	The	little
creature	 seemed	 to	 sense	 the	 teenager’s	 distress.	 With	 the	 wisdom	 that	 nature
gives	those	who	are	unspoilt	by	thoughts	of	right	or	wrong,	the	small	bird	sensed
the	 human	 meant	 no	 harm,	 and	 sat	 mourning	 its	 love,	 killed	 by	 the	 warriors	 of
dharma.	 The	 Prince	 of	 Hastinapura	 knelt	 a	 few	 feet	 away,	 his	 heart	 heavy.	 The
breeze	 ruffled	 the	 feathers	 of	 the	 dead	 bird.	 The	 Prince	 paused,	 hoping	 life
remained,	but	death	does	not	return	what	it	has	claimed.	The	bird	understood	the
ultimate	truth	first	and	stopped	its	cries.	But	the	Prince	was	just	a	fool	who	had
not	studied	the	scriptures	enough	to	know	that	death	is	just	like	changing	clothes
and	that	the	soul	never	dies.	He	sat	hoping	against	hope	that	the	little	bird	would
stir	and	he	could	take	it	home	and	nurse	it	back	to	health.	Behind	him,	a	jubilant
teacher	 and	 his	 favourite	 students	 returned	 to	 the	 palace.	 The	 lesson	 of	 dharma
had	been	strongly	instilled;	at	least	in	the	minds	of	the	Pandavas.
As	Suyodhana	reached	out	to	touch	the	dead	bird,	the	sound	of	running	feet	startled
him.	 Two	 dark-skinned	 boys	 ran	 out	 from	 behind	 a	 bush	 and	 grabbed	 the	 dead
bird.	“Hey!”	Suyodhana	yelled	at	the	vanishing	figures	of	two	Nishada	boys.	He
drew	 his	 sword	 but	 hesitated	 for	 a	 moment,	 glancing	 back	 at	 his	 cousins	 and
brothers,	 walking	 towards	 the	 palace.	 It	 was	 dangerous	 to	 follow	 the	 Nishadas.
The	forest	was	infested	with	Naga	warriors	and	the	Crown	Prince	of	Hastinapura
falling	into	 their	hands	would	be	a	disaster.	It	was	foolish	and	reckless.	But	the
agonized	cries	of	the	parrot	hovering	above	its	dead	mate,	made	the	Prince	follow.
‘To	hell	with	security,’	he	thought,	as	he	plunged	into	the	darkness	of	the	jungle.
***

Trees	 towered	 hundreds	 of	 feet	 over	 Suyodhana	 and	 cut	 off	 the	 fading	 sunlight.
The	eerie	chirping	of	crickets	and	the	croaking	of	toads	added	to	his	unease.	The
thieves	 were	 nowhere	 to	 be	 seen.	 They	 had	 vanished	 into	 the	 dark	 maze	 of
creepers	 and	 vines.	 After	 a	 while,	 the	 Prince	 realized	 he	 had	 lost	 his	 way	 and
cursed	 himself	 for	 his	 own	 madness	 in	 following	 them.	 He	 moved	 aimlessly
forward,	hacking	at	the	thick	undergrowth;	sometimes	finding	his	way	by	listening
to	the	cries	of	the	grieving	parrot.	By	the	time	he	stumbled	upon	a	small	clearing,
it	was	dark	and	the	bird	had	accepted	its	loss	and	flown	away	into	the	night.
A	small	fire	burned	in	the	clearing	and	a	woman	with	seven	children	of	varying
ages,	sat	around	it.	The	dancing	flames	cast	a	ghostly	light	onto	their	dark	faces.

Over	 the	 flames,	 the	 dead	 bird	 was	 being	 roasted	 as	 the	 children	 waited
expectantly.	Suyodhana	was	shocked.	What	bestiality!	What	cruelty!	What	sort	of
devils	 would	 do	 this?	 He	 wanted	 to	 drag	 them	 to	 Hastinapura	 and	 punish	 them.
But	 before	 he	 could	 act,	 a	 hand	 on	 his	 shoulder	 restrained	 him.	 Startled,
Suyodhana	 turned	 back.	 “Aswathama!”	 Hearing	 his	 voice,	 the	 eldest	 boy	 turned
towards	them.	Aswathama	quickly	pushed	Suyodhana	down	behind	the	bushes	and
motioned	to	him	to	remain	silent.	The	Nishada	boy	looked	in	their	direction	for	a
few	seconds	more	and	then	got	up	to	see	whether	the	bird	had	cooked.	He	began
cutting	it	up	and	distributing	it	to	the	others.
“Ekalavya,	give	me	a	bigger	piece,	I	found	it,”	a	small	boy	cried.
“Jara,	 you	 scoundrel!	 You	 have	 such	 a	 big	 stomach.”	 Cursing,	 Ekalavya	 took	 a
minuscule	 portion	 more	 and	 thrust	 it	 at	 the	 complaining	 boy.	 Jara	 grabbed	 it,
attacking	it	like	a	hungry	dog.
Suyodhana	watched	in	horror	as	the	Nishada	family	ate	with	relish.	As	they	were
licking	their	hands	clean,	the	woman	said	to	Ekalavya,	“It	is	good	that	your	hunting
skills	 have	 improved.	 This	 was	 a	 small	 bird	 but	 it	 was	 better	 than	 nothing.	 The
boys	were	famished.	Tomorrow,	try	for	bigger	game.”
“But	he	did	not...”	A	savage	kick	from	Ekalavya	ensured	Jara’s	silence.
“What	a	beast!”	Suyodhana	hissed	from	his	hiding	place.
“Do	not	judge	them,	Prince.	Did	you	not	hear	the	woman?	They	have	not	eaten	for
days.	 Hunger	 makes	 people	 do	 these	 things.	 For	 Arjuna,	 it	 was	 just	 a	 target;	 for
you	it	was	love	and	beauty;	for	them	it	is	food.”
Suyodhana	was	silent	for	a	long	time.	He	finally	stood	up	as	the	Nishada	family
fell	asleep	and	the	fire	died	down.	Aswathama	stood	up	too.	They	had	to	find	their
way	back.	With	Aswathama	beside	him,	Suyodhana	did	not	feel	the	uneasiness	that
had	 affected	 him	 earlier.	 Moonlight	 dappled	 the	 forest	 floor,	 shining	 through	 the
gaps	in	the	forest	canopy.	As	the	two	boys	competed	to	step	on	the	moonlit	patches
on	their	way	home,	Suyodhana	said,	“The	condition	of	these	tribes	in	our	kingdom
is	 so	 sad.	 It	 is	 a	 shame	 that	 so	 many	 people	 have	 nothing	 to	 eat.	 The	 way	 the
Untouchables	live,	is	pathetic.	Why	is	there	so	much	injustice	in	the	world?	Why
does	Uncle	Bhishma	do	nothing	about	it?	I	hate	the	stupid	taboos	and	caste	rules.”

“Suyodhana,	does	poverty	knock	at	the	door	and	ask	for	your	caste	before	entering
your	home?	Can	you	imagine	how	poor	we	were,	before	my	father	got	this	job?	I
had	never	seen	milk	in	my	life	before	we	came	here.	Once,	my	friends	tricked	me
by	 giving	 me	 batter	 to	 drink.	 I	 drank	 it	 thinking	 that	 was	 what	 milk	 tasted	 like.
True,	the	condition	of	the	lower	castes	is	bad,	but	there	is	great	poverty	in	every
caste.	A	few	people	have	wealth,	power	and	privilege.	The	majority	suffers.”
“I	hate	it	all.”
“So	change	it	my	friend.	After	all,	one	day	you	are	going	to	be	King.	I	hope	you
retain	the	same	fervour	then.	Power	corrupts	even	the	most	principled.”
“I	will	change	the	entire	system	when	I	become	King.	I	will...	hey	who	is	that?	Do
you	see?”
A	 lone	 figure	 was	 walking	 towards	 them.	 The	 boys	 quickly	 hid	 behind	 a	 tree.
Clouds	 had	 covered	 the	 moon	 and	 it	 was	 too	 dark	 to	 see	 the	 face	 of	 the	 person
approaching.	 As	 he	 neared	 them,	 the	 two	 boys	 jumped	 out	 with	 their	 swords
drawn	and	cried,	“Halt!”
In	a	trice,	the	other	had	drawn	his	sword	as	well.	At	that	moment,	the	moon	broke
free	 from	 the	 grip	 of	 the	 clouds.	 “Hey!	 Aren’t	 you	 that	 charioteer’s	 son?”
Suyodhana	was	surprised	to	find	him	there.
“Prince!	You	are	right,	I	am	Vasusena	Karna,	and	my	father	owes	his	employment
as	charioteer	to	the	kindness	of	your	father.	I	am	the	son	of	Athiratha	and	Radha.”
“What	brings	you	here	at	this	odd	hour?”
“I…	I…	I	am	on	a	pilgrimage	to	the	holy	places	in	the	South.”
“Pilgrimage!	 Are	 you	 old	 enough	 to	 go	 on	 a	 pilgrimage?	 And	 where	 are	 you
headed	to	in	the	South?”
“Oh…	 to	 Rameswaram,	 Gokarna,	 Muzaris,	 Madurai,	 Sree	 Sailam,	 Kalahasthi...
My	Guru	has	advised	me	to	travel,”	replied	Karna,	gazing	at	the	boys	steadily.
“It	is	rather	strange	that	Guru	Kripa	advised	you	to	go	on	a	pilgrimage.	But	best	of
luck,	my	friend.	Come	and	see	me	when	you	return,”	Suyodhana	said.

Karna	 bowed.	 Without	 looking	 back,	 the	 charioteer’s	 son	 walked	 away.	 His
destination	was	far	away	and	his	journey	was	long.	Parashurama’s	kingdom	was
located	at	the	southwestern	tip	of	India	and	it	took	six	months’	arduous	travel	over
hot	 deserts,	 imposing	 mountains,	 and	 raging	 rivers,	 to	 reach	 it.	 Many	 dangerous
tribes	like	the	Yakshas,	Kiratas,	Nishadas,	Nagas,	Gandharvas	and	Vanaras,	dwelt
in	the	thick	jungles	on	the	way.	It	was	an	expedition	of	extreme	peril	for	a	teenager
to	undertake	alone.	But	seeing	him	walk	away	with	determined	steps,	Suyodhana
felt	 nothing	 in	 this	 world	 could	 have	 stopped	 Karna.	 The	 Crown	 Prince	 of
Hastinapura	and	Aswathama	watched	him	vanish	into	the	trees.
“Aswathama,	I	have	a	feeling	he	will	be	back.	He	is	not	going	to	be	a	Priest.	I	can
see	 it	 in	 the	 way	 he	 carries	 himself	 –	 so	 proud,	 so	 confident.	 This	 is	 one	 of
Kripa’s	 practical	 jokes.	 Mark	 my	 words,	 that	 boy	 is	 going	 to	 come	 back	 and
nothing	will	be	the	same	again.”
“Keep	dreaming,	my	friend,”	laughed	Aswathama.	“Now,	let’s	get	some	exercise.
Let’s	 see	 if	 a	 Prince’s	 legs	 are	 as	 strong	 as	 those	 of	 a	 poor	 Brahmin	 boy.”
Aswathama	 sprinted	 off	 towards	 the	 distant	 palace,	 hooting	 and	 howling;
frightening	 the	 sleeping	 birds,	 which	 exploded	 in	 wild	 cries	 above	 them.
Suyodhana	gave	chase,	smiling	broadly.

8	RAMA	WITH	THE	PLOUGH
BY	WINTER,	KARNA	HAD	CROSSED	 the	desert	and	reached	the	ancient	and	holy	city	of

Prabhasa,	 along	 with	 a	party	of	merchants.	The	training	Kripa	had	given	him	 on
Brahmin	 rituals	 stood	 Karna	 in	 good	 stead	 and	 the	 doors	 of	 inns	 and	 temples
magically	opened	to	him.	The	sacred	thread	he	wore	was	a	ticket	to	perpetual	free
meals.	 Rich	 merchants	 and	 Princes	 bowed	 before	 him.	 He	 was	 uneasy	 with	 the
duplicity	and	was	often	tempted	to	cry	out	that	he	was	a	mere	Suta,	not	an	exalted
Brahmin	as	they	thought,	but	food	was	scarce	and	nobody	would	have	given	him	a
job	had	he	spoken	the	truth.	He	had	to	reach	Parashuramakhestra.	Had	Kripa	not
told	him	that	a	Brahmin	is	one	who	seeks	knowledge	and	not	merely	one	who	is
born	into	a	Brahmin	family?	Since	he	was	indeed	in	search	of	knowledge,	there
was	nothing	wrong	in	calling	himself	a	Brahmin.	The	son	of	a	charioteer	reminded
himself	of	his	teacher’s	words	to	calm	his	burning	conscience.
Karna	 halted	 in	 Prabhasa	 for	 a	 few	 weeks	 and	 watched	 a	 tribe	 of	 migrating
cowherds	 from	 the	 Yamuna	 plains.	 They	 were	 the	 Yadavas,	 fleeing	 their	 ancient
kingdom	of	Mathura,	following	an	invasion	by	the	powerful	monarch	of	Magadha,
Jarasandha.	The	Yadavas	had	camped	near	Prabhasa,	close	to	the	ancient	temple
of	Somanatha,	and	were	now	planning	to	move	on.	Karna	was	invited	along	with	a
group	of	other	Brahmins,	to	a	feast	the	Yadava	leader	was	hosting	at	the	temple.
He	 hesitated	 to	 go,	 afraid	 someone	 would	 discover	 he	 was	 an	 imposter.	 If	 it
became	known	he	was	a	Suta	and	had	dared	to	dine	with	his	betters,	death	would
surely	 follow.	 However,	 he	 could	 find	 no	 way	 of	 refusing	 the	 invitation	 without
sounding	churlish,	so	he	was	compelled	to	go	along.
Karna	tried	to	make	himself	as	inconspicuous	as	possible	as	the	Yadavas	came	to
wash	the	Brahmins’	feet.	The	soiled	water	was	considered	holy	and	sprinkled	on
the	 crowd	 that	 had	 come	 to	 watch.	 The	 Brahmins	 were	 then	 invited	 into	 a	 hall
where	plantain	leaves	had	been	laid	out	to	serve	the	feast.	As	Karna	chanted	the
mantra	along	with	hundreds	of	Brahmins,	before	touching	the	food,	he	caught	sight
of	 a	 dark	 young	 man,	 a	 few	 years	 older	 than	 himself.	 With	 a	 peacock	 feather
tucked	into	his	curly	hair	and	a	garland	of	marigolds	around	his	neck,	he	had	the
look	 of	 a	 handsome	 dandy.	 The	 yellow	 robes,	 the	 bamboo	 flute	 tucked

conspicuously	 into	 the	 sash	 at	 his	 waist,	 and	 the	 easy,	 confident	 way	 he	 carried
himself,	added	to	the	man’s	charisma.	Karna	felt	uneasy	in	his	presence.	It	was	as
though	 he	 could	 hide	 nothing	 from	 this	 dark	 young	 man	 who	 exuded	 such	 raw
energy.	Karna	felt	he	was	in	the	presence	of	someone	dangerous	but	he	seemed	to
be	the	only	person	in	the	room	to	be	so	affected.	The	young	man	was	all	charm,
sweetness	and	wit,	and	people	hung	on	his	every	word;	laughing	uproariously	at
his	jokes.	‘Perhaps	I	feel	guilty	because	I	have	a	secret	to	hide,’	thought	Karna.	He
prayed	for	this	ordeal	to	end.
“Why	 are	 you	 sweating,	 my	 friend?”	 The	 old	 Brahmin,	 who	 had	 been	 Karna’s
travelling	companion	for	some	time	now,	was	sitting	next	to	him.	He	fanned	Karna
with	his	angavastra	and	touched	his	forehead	to	check	for	fever.
“It	is	nothing,	Swami,”	Karna	replied	quickly,	feeling	guilty	about	the	old	man’s
kindness.	He	watched	with	concern	as	the	dark	young	man	began	walking	towards
them.	 Karna	 stopped	 eating.	 He	 could	 feel	 his	 heart	 thumping	 furiously	 in	 his
chest.
When	the	young	man	was	just	a	few	feet	away	and	Karna	was	convinced	his	cover
had	been	blown,	a	booming	voice	filled	the	room.	“Namaskara,	learned	men!	We
are	honoured	by	your	presence.”
Every	 eye	turned	towards	the	towering	man	standing	at	the	 entrance	with	folded
hands.	 He	 was	 dressed	 in	 white.	 The	 broad	 shoulders	 rippled	 with	 muscle.	 His
straight	 hair	 had	 been	 combed	 into	 a	 tight	 knot	 to	 the	 right	 of	 his	 forehead.	 He
exuded	 power,	 authority	 and	 elegance.	 But	 more	 than	 anything,	 it	 was	 his	 smile
that	set	him	apart	from	every	other	man	in	the	room.	There	was	more	kindness	and
benevolence	in	those	eyes	that	twinkled	with	amusement	than	Karna	had	ever	seen
in	anyone.
“Krishna,	 what	 are	 you	 doing	 here?	 Come,	 help	 me	 serve	 our	 guests.”	 The	 dark
young	man	moved	towards	the	newcomer,	smiling	quizzically	but	his	eyes	never
left	Karna,	whose	appetite	had	vanished	long	ago.	He	stood	up	now,	abandoning
his	meal.	As	he	went	out	to	wash	his	hands,	he	found	Krishna	standing	next	to	him,
his	arms	folded	across	his	chest,	a	smile	on	his	face.	Karna	stopped	in	his	tracks.
Suddenly	his	fear	fell	away.	His	cover	had	been	 blown	and	 he	 was	prepared	to
face	the	consequences.

“Who	are	you,	brother?”	Krishna	asked	sweetly.
“Vasusena	Karna.”
“Hmm,	and	which	caste	are	you?”
Karna	 said	 nothing	 but	 he	 wanted	 to	 scream,	 ‘How	 does	 it	 matter?’	 He	 felt	 the
familiar	frustration	welling	up.	All	his	efforts	had	been	in	vain.	All	the	travails,
the	hard	work,	all	those	mornings	he	had	stood	shivering	in	the	cold	waters	of	the
Ganga,	as	Kripa	taught	him	the	Gayatri	Mantra	and	the	Vedas;	it	had	all	been	for
nothing.	He	had	the	wrong	surname	and	it	did	not	matter	that	he	had	the	talent	and
willingness	to	work	harder	than	anybody	else.
Just	as	Karna	was	about	to	answer	that	he	was	a	mere	Suta,	he	heard	the	by	now
familiar,	boisterous	voice	say,	“Krishna,	there	you	are,	standing	around	chatting,
while	everyone	is	waiting	to	hear	my	dear	brother	play	the	flute.	Please	allow	me
the	honour	of	entertaining	this	learned	Brahmin.”
“But	Balarama	bhaiya...”
Before	Krishna	could	object	any	further,	Balarama	caught	Karna	by	the	hand	and
started	walking	away.	Karna	struggled	to	keep	pace	with	the	Yadava	leader,	who
said	 over	 his	 shoulder,	 “Krishna,	 go	 and	 do	 what	 you	 are	 good	 at	 and	 leave
governing	to	the	head	of	the	Yadava	Council,	my	boy.”
***

Krishna	 stood	 for	 a	 few	 moments	 more,	 shaking	 his	 head	 in	 amusement	 as	 his
brother	 dragged	 the	 young	 Brahmin	 towards	 his	 chamber.	 Did	 Balarama	 know
what	he	was	doing?	‘Such	upstarts	will	destroy	society	and	the	country,’	Krishna
thought	 sadly.	 ‘These	 emotional	 men	 and	 women,	 led	 by	 their	 senses	 and	 not	 by
logic,	 bring	 disaster	 upon	 everyone.	 Society	 remains	 stable	 because	 there	 is	 a
place	for	everyone	and	everything	in	chaturvarna.’
Krishna	failed	to	understand	why	men	like	Kripa	and	Carvaka	were	against	one	of
the	 most	 efficient	 systems	 developed	 for	 a	 stable	 society.	 In	 chaturvarna,	 each
person	 knew	 his	 kula	and	 dharma,	 and	 hence	 his	 path	 in	 life.	 A	 man	 born	 as	 a
charioteer	 got	 the	 best	 possible	 training	 to	 become	 one	 and	 excel	 in	 that
profession.	 He	 learnt	 the	 trade	 from	 childhood.	 He	 did	 not	 have	 to	 fear	 any

competition	and	his	livelihood	was	assured.	So	was	it	with	other	professions,	be
it	 trade,	 the	 Priesthood,	 or	 medicine.	 Men	 and	 women	 did	 not	 waste	 precious
years	 of	 their	 lives	 learning	 skills	 that	 were	 of	 no	 use	 to	 them.	 Instead,	 they
became	experts	in	their	kula	dharma.
What	was	the	alternative?	Everybody	learning	whatever	they	liked	and	competing
with	 each	 other	 to	 survive,	 like	 animals?	 Such	 societies	 could	 only	 collapse.
Chaturvarna	 had	 been	 developed	 by	 Lord	 Vishnu	 himself	 as	 the	 Preserver	 of
social	order.	‘Why	do	I	always	dream	that	I	was	born	into	this	world	to	preserve
order?	 Perhaps	 I	 am	 Vishnu’s	 avatar;	 the	 one	 sages	 have	 long	 predicted	 will
appear.’	Krishna	smiled	at	the	thought.	‘“I	am	Vishnu,	Preserver	of	the	Universe,”
had	a	nice	ring	to	it.	Why	not?	I	have	come	to	preserve	dharma	in	the	world.	How
good	our	pastoral	life	was	when	we	followed	kula	dharma.	Ah	Radha!	My	first
love.	Where	are	you	now?’	Krishna	almost	said	the	words	aloud,	and	then	shook
his	 head,	 a	 mocking	 smile	 on	 his	 lips.	 ‘Am	 I	 getting	 emotional?	 Never!
Stithapranja	is	the	aim	of	the	ideal	man	–	to	remain	calm	in	all	circumstances,	all
the	 time	 –	 in	 birth,	 death,	 love,	 war	 or	 peace.	 Live	 in	 the	 world	 like	 a	 drop	 of
water	 on	 a	 lotus	 petal,	 thinking	 only	 about	 doing	 one’s	 duty,	 irrespective	 of	 the
results,	and	not	getting	bothered	about	success	or	failure.	That	is	the	meaning	of
life!’
It	was	unfortunate	that	some	men	had	to	die	in	the	cause	of	dharma.	Some	of	them
were	 good	 men,	 but	 misguided.	 Krishna	 thought	 about	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 of
Hastinapura.	Suyodhana	was	a	large-hearted	fool	who	was	destabilizing	society.
The	young	‘Brahmin’	he	had	met	today	was	another	example	of	misguided	youth.
Krishna	 smiled	 to	 himself	 thinking	 that	 the	 foolish	 boy	 had	 not	 hoodwinked	 him
for	even	a	minute.	He	knew.	Karna	should	have	been	content	to	have	become	the
best	Suta;	instead,	he	wanted	to	be	something	else,	and	he	was	going	to	cause	a
great	deal	of	trouble.	Such	a	waste.	Bhishma	too,	was	a	truly	noble	man,	but	again,
misguided.	If	he	wanted	to	fight	the	system,	he	should	fight	for	the	equality	of	the
varnas,	 instead	 of	 mixing	 the	 castes.	 That	 could	 only	 lead	 to	 chaos.	 His	 own
brother	Balarama	was	doing	everything	possible	to	harm	the	established	order	by
moving	 the	 Yadavas	 away	 from	 their	 kula	 dharma	 of	 cow	 herding	 towards
agriculture	and	trade.	It	was	going	to	end	in	catastrophe.	‘War	might	be	the	only
answer,’	 Krishna	 pondered	 sorrowfully.	 War	 would	 bring	 death	 and	 destruction,
but	 there	 was	 little	 choice.	 ‘Life!	 Death!	 They	 were	 but	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same
coin.	Is	there	anything	called	Death?	Does	the	Soul	die?	Surely,	the	Soul	is	eternal

–	 without	 beginning	 or	 end.	 Atma!	 My	 slice	 of	 the	 Universal	 Soul,	 the	 Supreme
Paramatama.’
Life	was	nothing	but	the	animated	manifestation	of	the	supreme	soul.	Death	was	its
transformation	to	the	inanimate.	The	soul	remains,	just	the	forms	change,	as	per	the
rhythm	of	the	universe.	The	dance	of	energy,	from	inanimate	to	animate,	from	death
to	 life	 and	 life	 to	 death.	 This	 is	 the	 eternal	 cycle!	 How	 does	 it	 matter	 if	 a	 few
people	die	or	live	in	this	vast	universe:	the	timeless,	beginingless,	endless	infinity
that	always	was	and	always	will	be?	Does	it	care	if	someone	lives	or	dies?	Then
why	 are	 men	 so	 afraid	 of	 death	 and	 war?	 As	 there	 is	 a	 rhythm	 in	 the	 universe,
there	should	be	a	rhythm	for	society,	for	life.	Men	like	Suyodhana	were	creating
disharmony,	 like	 misbeats	 in	 the	 tala.	 This	 young	 man	 was	 going	 to	 be	 another
headache.	It	is	sad,	yet	a	few	had	to	die.	A	war,	an	all-consuming	war	would	be
required.	That	is	my	burden,	thought	Krishna,	may	be	my	duty,	my	dharma	 and	I
have	to	do	it	without	worrying	about	the	consequences.
‘Where	are	you	running	to,	Karna?	Ultimately	you	will	have	to	face	me.’	Krishna
chuckled	at	the	thought.
“Krishna,	the	sabha	is	waiting	for	you.”	A	Yadava	elder	came	to	him	and	touched
his	shoulder.
Krishna	smiled,	pulled	his	flute	from	his	sash,	and	walked	towards	the	sabha.	As
he	entered,	the	entire	assembly	rose	in	applause.	He	stood	before	them	and	smiled
at	 the	 percussionists	 who	 were	 acknowledging	 him	 by	 tapping	 their	 mrudanga.
Soon,	 the	 magic	 of	 his	 music	 carried	 the	 entire	 sabha	 to	 another	 world,	 where
there	was	only	beauty	and	love.	The	real	world	stood	still,	in	rapturous	attention.
***

Meanwhile,	 a	 trembling	 Karna	 stood	 before	 the	 seated	 Yadava	 leader.	 He	 had
decided	 to	 fight	 if	 the	 powerful	 man	 before	 him	 ordered	 his	 death	 for
impersonating	a	Brahmin.	Faintly,	he	could	hear	music	and	tried	to	shut	it	out.
“Sit	down,	my	friend,”	said	Balarama,	gesturing	with	one	hand.
Karna	was	surprised	at	the	kindness	in	his	voice.	‘Perhaps	he	is	not	as	observant
as	his	younger	brother	and	has	not	seen	through	my	deception.’	Then	Karna	shook
his	head,	not	wishing	to	continue	the	pretence.	“Swami,	I	am	not	what	you	think.	I

am	a	lowly	Suta,	not	a	Brahmin.	I	belong	to	one	of	the	lower	jatis	of	the	Shudras,
hardly	above	Pariahs	and	other	Untouchables.”
“Oh!	 Who	 is	 a	 Suta?	 And	 why	 is	 he	 lower	 than	 a	 Brahmin	 and	 higher	 than	 a
Pariah?	I	am	only	an	ignorant	farmer.	Please	educate	me.”
Karna	heard	the	smile	in	Balarama’s	question.	It	made	him	angry.	He	should	never
have	agreed	to	this	farce.	He	ought	to	have	stayed	in	Hastinapura	and	helped	his
father.	Better	still,	he	should	have	ended	his	life	in	the	Ganga;	if	only	Kripa	had
not	been	so	hell	bent	on	saving	him.	This	was	all	Kripa’s	idea	of	a	practical	joke.
“My	father	is	a	Suta	charioteer	and	the	Pariahs	are…”	The	loathsomeness	of	what
he	had	said	struck	him	then.	That	such	words	could	escape	his	mouth	showed	that
he	too,	was	not	free	of	caste	prejudice.
Balarama	 enjoyed	 the	 spectacle	 of	 the	 proud	 young	 man	 squirming	 at	 his	 own
words.	“You	may	have	thought	ill	of	the	Brahmins	until	you	realized	that	you	too,
are	capable	of	uttering	the	same	words	you	accuse	others	of.	You	have	travelled	in
the	 company	 of	 Brahmins.	 How	 disgusting	 have	 you	 found	 them	 to	 be	 as
individuals?”
Karna	 remained	 silent,	 feeling	 more	 ashamed	 with	 every	 passing	 minute.	 He
remembered	the	old	Brahmin	who	had	been	his	companion	for	most	of	the	journey;
who	treated	him	like	a	son.	He	was	one	of	the	most	learned	men	Karna	had	met
and	commanded	the	respect	of	all.	The	septuagenarian	had	once	trekked	for	three
hours	to	find	a	physician	when	Karna	had	fallen	ill.	‘Perhaps	he	would	not	have
done	 it	 had	 he	 known	 I	 was	 a	 Suta	 and	 not	 a	 Brahmin	 at	 all,’	 thought	 Karna
bitterly.
“I	am	sure	you	would	have	found	in	that	group	some	men	of	noble	character,	some
charlatans,	 and	 the	 majority	 who	 just	 follow	 whatever	 the	 collective	 is	 doing,
without	questioning	anything.	There	is	nothing	special	about	that.	Take	any	group
of	people	and	you	will	find	the	same	thing.	Remember,	they	too,	are	victims	of	the
system.	The	people	who	meekly	follow	caste	rules	are	really	the	people	who	are
afraid	of	breaking	them.	They	are	cowardly,	not	cruel.	They	deserve	understanding
rather	than	derision.	The	future	is	in	the	hands	of	young	men	like	you,	who	must
lead	the	change.	Our	country	deserves	a	better	system.	You	are	neither	above	the
poor	Pariah	nor	below	any	Brahmin,	Kshatriya,	Vaishya,	or	any	jati	or	varna.	You
are	what	you	think	you	are.	I	had	hoped	Kripa	would	have	taught	you	that	by	now.”

Karna	was	shocked	to	hear	his	Guru’s	name.	Balarama	laughed.	“Why	are	you	so
shocked?	He	and	I	are	old	friends.	He	wrote	to	me	about	you	as	soon	as	you	left
Hastinapura.	 In	 fact,	 your	 Guru	 has	 gone	 a	 step	 further	 to	 ensure	 you	 are	 not
caught.	Knowing	you	are	not	well	versed	with	certain	rituals,	he	entrusted	you	to
the	care	of	one	of	the	most	learned	Brahmins	in	the	group.	The	old	man	who	has
been	travelling	with	you	and	even	acted	as	your	nurse	once,	is	your	protector	and
guide	at	Kripa’s	request.“
Karna	burned	with	shame	at	the	uncharitable	thoughts	he	had	harboured	about	the
old	man.	He	had	known	all	along	that	Karna	was	a	Suta,	yet	he	had	not	shown	any
sign	 of	 the	 prejudice	 and	 aversion	 Karna	 had	 come	 to	 associate	 with	 his	 caste
superiors.
“Karna,	remember	one	thing	in	life.	Never	associate	any	evil	with	a	group.	Hate
their	sins,	but	not	the	people.	Be	generous.	Keep	giving	and	the	world	will	return
those	 favours	 manifold.	 I	 know	 young	 men	 of	 your	 age	 do	 not	 enjoy	 receiving
advice	 from	 older	 people	 like	 me,	 so	 I	 will	 not	 bore	 you	 further.	 Since	 you	 are
going	to	Muzaris,	why	not	take	a	ride	in	one	of	my	ships?	It	will	carry	you	swiftly
to	your	destination.	It	will	be	fun	and	a	great	adventure	for	someone	your	age.	Yes,
I	know	I	am	asking	you	to	break	the	taboo	the	Priests	have	decreed.	If	everyone
who	travelled	by	sea	lost	their	caste,	it	would	be	the	best	thing	to	happen	to	us.
Our	civilization	produced	great	adventurers	and	sailors	in	days	gone	by.	I	want	to
bring	those	glorious	days	back.	That	is	why	I	have	chosen	to	build	my	dream	city
of	Dwaraka	by	the	sea.	What	was	once	the	glory	of	the	Asuras	of	the	South,	I	want
to	bring	to	all	of	India.	I	will	build	cities	all	along	the	Eastern	and	Western	coasts
of	this	vast	land	and	connect	them	with	large	ports	on	our	mighty	rivers.”
Balarama	 walked	 up	 and	 down	 like	 a	 man	 possessed.	 Karna	 watched	 in
fascination	as	the	enigmatic	leader	of	the	Yadavas	spelt	out	his	vision	not	only	for
his	 own	 clan,	 but	 also	 for	 the	 whole	 of	 India.	 “I	 want	 to	 open	 the	 world	 to	 my
people.	 They	 should	 not	 remain	 ignorant	 cattle-herders,	 led	 by	 selfish	 Priests,
stuck	with	ancient	rituals	and	meaningless	mumbo-jumbo.	You	will	have	observed
that	rulers	roam	about	wearing	weapons	of	their	choice	–	they	are	leaders	because
they	have	the	power	to	hurt,	kill	and	maim.	It	is	the	fear	of	the	sword,	which	earns
them	respect.	I	too,	used	to	command	respect	with	my	mace	when	I	was	younger
but	 as	 wisdom	 slowly	 seeped	 into	 my	 head,	 I	 have	 come	 to	 believe	 that	 true
leadership	 means	 earning	 respect	 through	 my	 deeds.	 So	 I	 have	 abandoned	 the
mace	and	now	carry	a	plough.	It	is	not	just	an	agricultural	implement.	I	carry	it	as

a	 symbol	 of	 progress.	 I	 wish	 for	 agriculture	 to	 flourish,	 trade	 to	 boom.	 It	 is	 a
dream	I	share	with	people	like	Kripa,	Bhishma,	Vidhura	and	Carvaka.	Do	not	look
so	surprised,	my	boy.	We	all	share	the	same	dream,	only	our	methods	differ.	The
dream	of	wiping	out	hunger	from	this	land	and	giving	dignity	to	people,	who	live
like	animals,	may	not	turn	into	reality	in	our	lifetimes,	but	why	should	we	worry
when	 there	 are	 young	 men	 like	 you,	 who	 are	 bold	 enough	 to	 travel	 thousands	 of
miles	in	search	of	knowledge?”
Karna	felt	a	sob	choking	his	throat.	Nobody	had	ever	put	so	much	faith	in	this	poor
Suta	boy	or	spoken	to	him	as	an	equal.	It	was	exhilarating.	Perhaps	he	could	be	a
great	warrior.	It	had	just	been	a	selfish	dream	but	now,	it	seemed	to	have	gained
greater	 purpose.	 Becoming	 a	 warrior	 would	 not	 simply	 be	 an	 escape	 from
poverty;	it	would	also	be	a	journey	of	self-discovery,	an	adventure	–	a	cause	far
greater	than	petty	ambition.	The	dream	was	now	his	destiny.
“Karna,	when	you	reach	the	land	of	Parashurama,	you	will	find	many	things	that
will	fill	you	with	anger	and	contempt.	You	will	see	a	proud	race	living	like	dogs
under	meaningless	taboos,	bound	by	caste	hierarchy.	Do	not	become	agitated	and
do	something	rash	and	foolish.	Remember	that	you	are	there	for	a	purpose.	There
is	no	warrior	in	the	whole	of	India,	including	Bhishma	and	Drona,	who	can	match
Parashurama’s	 skill.	 Learn	 whatever	 you	 can	 from	 him.	 One	 day	 the	 time	 will
come	to	use	that	skill	for	a	greater	cause.	Do	not	hesitate	to	say	you	are	a	Brahmin
when	Parashurama	asks.”
Balarama’s	 final	 words	 brought	 Karna	 back	 to	 reality.	 How	 would	 he	 answer
Parashurama	when	asked	the	dreaded	question?	He	had	never	uttered	an	untruth	in
all	his	young	life.	Now	he	had	to	lie	to	achieve	his	aim.	Was	it	not	like	stealing?
“Karna,	 do	 not	 feel	 embarrassed	 when	 he	 asks	 about	 your	 caste.	 Look	 into	 his
eyes	 and	 answer	 boldly	 that	 you	 are	 a	 Brahmin.	 He	 will	 ask	 in	 his	 own	 narrow
way	 but	 you	 will	 answer	 with	 the	 truth	 that	 lives	 in	 our	 holy	 books.	 You	 are	 a
seeker	of	knowledge,	a	Brahmin	in	the	purest	sense.	You	are	more	Brahmin	than
Parashurama.	Once	you	become	a	warrior	and	work	for	society,	you	will	become
a	 Kshatriya,	 protector	 of	 the	 weak.	 When	 you	 bring	 prosperity	 to	 your	 people
through	 your	 work,	 you	 will	 become	 a	 Vaishya.	 When	 you	 bring	 happiness	 to
people	through	your	love,	compassion	and	service,	you	will	be	a	Shudra.	You	will
be	 all	 varnas	and	 more	 –	 you	 will	 be	 a	 humane	 being.	 Nothing	 is	 greater	 than
that.”

The	 curtains	 fluttered	 in	 a	 gentle	 breeze	 that	 carried	 the	 salty	 taste	 of	 the	 sea.
Voices	 could	 be	 heard	 from	 outside,	 ordering	 labourers	 to	 load	 cargo.	 Karna
bowed	and	touched	the	feet	of	the	Yadava	leader.	Balarama	blessed	his	protégé,
took	a	pouch	of	gold	coins	from	his	waist,	and	gave	it	to	him.	“This	will	help	you
with	 your	 expenses.	 My	 first	 ship	 with	 cargo	 will	 be	 leaving	 any	 time	 now.	 I
wanted	to	launch	it	from	this	holy	town	of	Prabhasa.	Look,	the	sails	are	unfurling
now.	Let	the	compassionate	eyes	of	Lord	Somanatha	always	follow	you.	Karna,	I
wish	all	that	is	best	in	life	for	you.	I	have	to	see	to	some	details	of	merchandise
now,	but	we	will	meet	in	circumstances	that	are	more	leisurely	one	day.	By	then,
my	young	friend,	you	will	be	the	best	warrior	in	India.	Remember,	you	carry	our
dreams	with	you.	When	you	achieve	your	goal,	do	not	forget	what	you	owe	to	each
blade	of	grass	of	this	land.	God	bless	you.”
Karna	watched	Balarama	turn	away,	trying	to	hide	his	deep	emotion.	The	Yadava
leader	walked	past	the	Suta	boy	in	a	blur.	Karna	felt	inspired;	his	self-doubts	had
vanished.	What	Kripa	had	not	been	able	to	do	in	ten	months	of	teaching,	Balarama
had	achieved	in	ten	minutes.	Karna	was	no	longer	the	same	boy	who	had	entered
the	Yadava	chamber	burdened	by	the	guilt	of	his	deception.	Now	he	was	a	young
man	 with	 a	 vision	 of	 his	 destiny.	 No	 taboo	 was	 going	 to	 stop	 him.	 No	 man	 was
going	 to	 stand	 in	 his	 way.	 But	 as	 he	 walked	 out	 into	 the	 bright	 afternoon,	 Karna
found	the	dark	form	of	Krishna	standing	in	his	way.
“Who	are	you?”	Krishna	asked.
Karna	smiled.	“I	am	nobody,	my	Lord.”
“Clever!	But	give	me	a	straight	answer.	Who	are	you?”
“I	 am	 everybody,”	 said	 Karna,	 laughing	 aloud	 and	 gently	 pushing	 Balarama’s
brother	out	of	his	way.
Krishna	 wanted	 to	 stop	 him,	 but	 caught	 sight	 of	 his	 brother	 standing	 a	 few	 feet
away,	looking	at	them.	He	remained	silent	as	Karna	walked	away.
Labourers	had	pushed	the	ship	into	the	water	and	now	it	gently	rose	and	fell	on	the
waves.	 The	 sails	 were	 being	 tested	 when	 Karna	 went	 on	 board.	 The	 Captain
ordered	his	humble	baggage	to	be	placed	in	a	corner	of	the	deck.	For	a	long	time
Karna	 sat	 watching	 the	 glistening	 tower	 of	 the	 Somanatha	 temple	 rising	 into	 the

sky,	and	the	sprawling	city	of	Prabhasa.	As	the	sea	turned	saffron	in	the	setting	sun
and	 the	 air	 resounded	 with	 the	 cries	 of	 seagulls,	 Karna	 felt	 the	 ship	 creak	 and
move.	 The	 anchor	 was	 raised	 and	 a	 line	 of	 rowers	 pulled	 hard	 to	 take	 the	 ship
towards	the	high	seas.	As	the	sails	unfurled	to	catch	the	wind	and	the	ship	swayed
before	steadying,	Karna	clutched	the	railing	to	stabilise	himself.	He	watched	the
temple	towers	glimmer	in	the	sun	while	the	sea	spread	its	red-tinted	mantle	in	the
west.
“South	ahoy!”	someone	cried	and	the	ship	turned	and	gathered	speed.
With	his	dark	mane	flying	in	the	wind	and	the	evening	star	rising	in	the	heavens
above,	Karna	stood	in	silence,	fighting	hope	and	fear.	In	travelling	by	sea,	he	had
lost	 his	 caste.	 Karna	 felt	 strangely	 elated.	 The	 last	 rays	 of	 the	 sun	 caressed	 his
strong	body	as	if	in	blessing	and	then	sank	into	the	watery	depths.	Swaying	in	the
wind	and	moving	to	the	rhythm	of	the	oarsmen’s	song,	the	ship	carried	the	young
man	and	his	burden	of	destiny	to	the	dangerous	land	of	the	Gods.

9	THE	BEAST
THE	FOREST	SLOWLY	AWOKE	TO	THE	 chattering	of	birds.	Jara	was	reluctant	to	leave

his	soft	bed	of	grass.	It	was	so	cosy	lying	in	the	shade	of	the	trees	and	watching
the	mist	slowly	rise	from	a	shy	earth.	Shafts	of	sunlight	pierced	holes	in	the	forest
canopy.	Monkeys	had	begun	their	clever	antics	high	in	the	trees.	They	jumped	from
branch	to	branch,	screeching	at	each	other	for	no	apparent	reason.	From	the	corner
of	his	eye,	Jara	saw	Ekalavya	was	occupied	in	making	a	bow.	Curiosity	overcame
laziness	and	he	bounded	up.	He	ran	to	Ekalavya	and	took	out	an	arrow	from	the
quiver.
“Don’t	 touch	 it,	 you	 ass!”	 shouted	 Ekalavya,	 without	 even	 raising	 his	 head.	 He
was	busy	polishing	the	bow.	It	had	begun	to	gleam	in	the	sunlight.
“Hey,	are	you	serious	about	becoming	an	archer?”	Jara	did	not	receive	a	reply.	‘If
Ekalavya	learns	archery,	we	will	have	more	to	eat,’	he	thought	as	he	touched	the
sharp	tip	of	the	arrow	with	a	finger.
“Ouch!”	 Jara	 howled,	 looking	 at	 the	 stone	 that	 had	 hit	 him	 hard.	 The	 stone
Ekalavya	had	thrown	had	found	its	mark	on	Jara’s	knee	and	was	rolling	off	a	few
feet	away.
“I	 told	 you	 not	 to	 touch	 it.”	 Ekalavya	 pointed	 one	 unwavering	 finger	 at	 the
whimpering	urchin.
It	 was	 not	 the	 usual	 banter	 Jara	 was	 used	 to	 from	 the	 older	 boy.	 Ekalavya	 had
somehow	gained	more	power	and	authority	overnight.	He	watched	Ekalavya	string
the	 bow	 and	 test	 it	 by	 twanging	 the	 string	 twice.	 Then,	 with	 a	 great	 air	 of
importance,	 he	 took	 an	 arrow,	 examined	 its	 straightness	 by	 closing	 one	 eye	 and
sighting	down	the	tip,	and	then	drew	the	bow	and	took	aim.	He	had	drawn	a	circle
on	 the	 trunk	 of	 a	 huge	 tree	 that	 was	 almost	 fifteen	 feet	 in	 diameter.	 Jara	 waited
with	 bated	 breath.	 After	 what	 seemed	 an	 eternity,	 Ekalavya	 shot	 the	 arrow.	 It
swished	 through	 the	 air.	 Jara	 looked	 at	 the	 fig	 tree	 but	 there	 was	 no	 arrow
embedded	in	the	trunk.	Ekalavya	had	missed	the	mark	and	even	managed	to	miss
the	 huge	 tree!	 Jara	 howled	 with	 laughter,	 doing	 a	 somersault	 in	 amusement.

Ekalavya	kicked	at	the	boy	but	Jara	dodged	him	and	continued	laughing.	Jara	knew
Ekalavya	had	lost	his	power	over	him.	He	was	no	longer	intimidated	by	Ekalavya.
He	 was	 just	 another	 nondescript	 urchin	 –	 plain	 and	 ordinary.	 Jara	 ran	 off
enthusiastically	to	find	the	arrow.	He	shouted	in	glee	when	he	found	it	a	good	ten
feet	 to	 the	 right	 of	 the	 tree.	 It	 had	 not	 even	 pierced	 the	 earth.	 In	 fact,	 it	 had	 hit
nothing	and	was	lying	docile,	just	another	piece	of	dry	wood	with	a	sharp	tip.
Jara	knew	he	was	making	Ekalavya	angry	with	his	constant	jeering	but	it	was	fun.
He	waited	until	Ekalavya	almost	caught	him	and	then	dashed	away	to	climb	up	a
banyan	tree.	Jara	sat	on	a	high	branch,	swinging	his	spindly	legs	and	screaming	at
Ekalavya	like	a	monkey.	Ekalavya	tried	shooting	arrows	at	him,	but	they	did	not
reach	high	enough.	This	increased	Jara’s	merriment	and	he	started	throwing	twigs
at	his	tormentor.	A	few	found	their	mark	and	enraged	Ekalavya	further.	Jara	could
climb	 dizzyingly	 high	 and	 even	 jump	 from	 tree	 to	 tree	 like	 an	 ape.	 He	 knew	 the
older	 boy	 could	 not	 touch	 him.	 Finally,	 Ekalavya	 gave	 up	 the	 chase	 and	 started
towards	Hastinapura	instead.	Jara	clambered	down	and	began	following	Ekalavya
at	a	discreet	distance.
After	an	hour	of	walking,	they	reached	the	open	ground	where	Drona	was	teaching
the	 Princes.	 Ekalavya	 hid	 behind	 a	 bush	 to	 watch.	 Then	 he	 noticed	 Jara	 hiding
behind	a	nearby	bush	and	uttered	a	silent	curse.	Jara	waved	at	him	and	put	out	his
tongue,	irritating	Ekalavya	further.	Jara	was	glad	they	had	come	to	the	same	place
where	they	got	the	parrot.	Perhaps	the	bearded	man	would	ask	one	of	the	Princes
to	shoot	a	deer	today.	If	they	could	steal	it,	as	they	had	the	bird,	they	would	not
have	to	worry	about	food	for	days.
After	hours	of	observation,	Ekalavya	discovered	he	had	been	doing	it	all	wrong.
His	grip,	his	stance,	and	even	the	way	he	held	his	head	while	taking	aim,	were	all
wrong.	He	made	a	mental	note	of	how	the	Princes	did	it.	The	Guru	was	sweet	to	a
handsome	teenager	 who	shot	 arrows	with	surprising	agility	and	skill	 –	 the	 same
boy	who	had	shot	the	parrot	through	its	eye	and	so	provided	their	meal.	‘I	will	be
better	than	him,’	vowed	Ekalavya.	He	was	tempted	to	go	and	ask	the	Guru	whether
he	would	teach	him	as	well.	What	was	so	wrong	in	trying?	He	had	heard	rumours
that	Kripa	was	training	the	Suta	boy.	Of	course,	Sutas	were	many	notches	above
Nishadas	in	the	caste	hierarchy,	but	why	not	try	it?	‘If	he	insults	me,	what	will	I
do?’	Ekalavya	wondered.	Conflicting	thoughts	tortured	the	young	Nishada	boy.	He
was	afraid	of	rejection,	but	the	ambition	that	burned	in	his	mind	was	too	strong	to
ignore.	By	the	evening,	he	had	decided	to	take	the	chance.

As	 Ekalavya	 approached	 Drona,	 the	 evening	 sun	 was	 slowly	 setting	 behind	 the
distant	mountains.	The	boys	sat	in	rows.	Drona	was	reciting	a	mantra.	 The	boys
repeated	 it	 with	 waning	 enthusiasm.	 Ekalavya	 found	 his	 courage	 draining	 away
with	each	step.	He	wanted	to	run	back	and	hide	in	the	bushes	but	it	was	too	late.
He	heard	footsteps	behind	him	and	knew	that	blasted	urchin	had	followed	him.	As
they	drew	near,	Drona	looked	at	the	Untouchables	in	surprise	and	shock.	Ekalavya
heard	the	chanting	stop	as	all	eyes	turned	towards	them.	Drona	stood	like	a	statue
carved	 from	 stone,	 mentally	 measuring	 the	 distance	 between	 them	 to	 avoid
pollution	 as	 per	 the	 smritis.	 He	 stood	 with	 his	 arms	 crossed	 over	 his	 muscular
chest,	his	eyebrows	raised.	Ekalavya	shuddered.	He	considered	touching	Drona’s
feet	as	he	had	seen	the	Princes	do	every	day	and	tentatively	took	a	step	forward.
“Stop!”
Ekalavya	froze	at	Drona’s	command.	‘Why	did	I	come?’	he	wondered.
“Why	are	you	here?”
Ekalavya	seemed	to	have	lost	all	power	of	speech.	“Swami,	I…	I…	wish	to	be
your	student,”	he	somehow	managed.
“I	have	seen	you	somewhere	before.	Wait,	are	you	not	the	Nishada	boy	who	stole
the	mangoes	when	I	first	came	to	this	lawless	land?”	the	Guru	asked.
Ekalavya	just	wanted	to	turn	and	run.	He	should	not	have	come.	This	was	no	place
for	Untouchables	like	him.
The	 Guru	 of	 the	 Royals	 peered	 down	 at	 the	 cowering	 Nishada	 boy.	 Turning	 to
Suyodhana,	Drona	hissed,	“See	what	your	father	has	done.	He	has	allowed	such
worms	to	rise	up	and	demand	education	from	Brahmins.	See	how	this	country	has
been	ruined.	I	knew	it	would	come	to	this.	I	warned	the	Grand	Regent	of	the	Kurus
long	 ago.	 Making	 a	 Shudra	 the	 Prime	 Minister;	 allowing	 all	 sorts	 of	 freedom	 to
people	 who	 do	 not	 deserve	 it.	 Disgusting!	 First,	 the	 Suta	 boy	 wanted	 to	 be	 my
student,	 with	 the	 Prime	 Minister	 actually	 recommending	 his	 case.	 Now	 even
Untouchables	want	to	be	archers.	The	rise	of	the	Kali	Yuga	is	imminent.	If	this	is
the	case	now,	what	atrocities	will	occur	when	you	become	the	ruler	of	this	land,
Prince?	Not	that	you	ever	will	be.”

Suyodhana’s	 eyes	 lit	 with	 anger	 but	 before	 he	 could	 respond,	 Drona	 turned
towards	the	Nishada	boy,	who	was	still	standing	with	his	head	hanging	in	shame.
Ekalavya	 could	 sense	 Jara	 laughing	 behind	 him.	 He	 saw	 Prince	 Suyodhana
looking	at	the	urchin	in	curiosity.	Drona	too,	looked	at	the	pathetic	figure.	The	boy
had	sores	on	his	feet	and	his	dark,	curly	hair	had	matted	into	a	dirty	coil.	With	his
spindly	 legs,	 protruding	 belly,	 and	 rashes	 all	 over	 his	 skin,	 he	 was	 a	 disgusting
object	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	 fastidious	 Guru.	 Ekalavya’s	 heart	 skipped	 a	 beat	 as	 he
watched	his	face.
“You	dirty	devil!	How	dare	you	come	and	pollute	this	place?”
Ekalavya	 thought	 at	 first	 that	 the	 Guru	 was	 addressing	 him.	 It	 took	 him	 a	 few
moments	 to	 realize	 the	 Guru’s	 anger	 was	 directed	 at	 Jara,	 standing	 behind	 him
with	a	stupid	grin	on	his	face.	‘Oh	Shiva!	Why	did	the	nitwit	follow	me	and	spoil
my	chances?	If	he	had	not	come,	the	Guru	would	not	have	been	so	angry.’
Jara	 tried	 to	 stand	 still	 but	 an	 overwhelming	 urge	 to	 scratch	 overcame	 him.
Disregarding	 the	 holy	 presence	 of	 a	 pious	 Brahmin	 and	 the	 Princes	 in	 their
resplendent	garb,	the	slum	dog’s	nails	scratched	patterns	on	his	body.	Jara	tried	to
compensate	with	a	buck-toothed	smile.
“Get	 out	 of	 here!”	 shouted	 Drona,	 his	 chest	 heaving	 with	 anger	 as	 laughter	 rose
from	 the	 ranks	 of	 his	 students.	 Many	 of	 the	 Princes	 found	 this	 little	 monkey
amusing	 and	 one	 of	 the	 Kaurava	 Princes	 whistled	 softly.	 Suyodhana,	 Sushasana,
and	 Aswathama,	 were	 all	 laughing.	 Bhima	 shared	 his	 Kaurava	 cousins’
amusement	but	caught	the	eye	of	his	elder	brother	and	stopped	himself	just	in	time.
He	imitated	the	serious	expression	his	brothers	wore	and	tried	to	look	sufficiently
enraged	at	the	insult	the	two	Untouchables	were	offering	the	strict	Guru.
“Silence!”	 Drona	 directed	 his	 anger	 towards	 the	 Kauravas.	 As	 the	 hilarity	 died
down,	 Drona	 turned	 his	 ire	 on	 the	 two	 Untouchables.	 Jara	 instinctively	 read
Drona’s	mind	and	 backed	away.	The	foolish	grin	had	gone	from	his	face	and	an
expression	 of	 concern	 replaced	 it.	 Drona	 took	 a	 few	 steps	 towards	 Ekalavya.
“Boy.”	 Drona’s	 voice	 had	 lost	 its	 harsh	 edge.	 Ekalavya	 looked	 up	 in	 surprise.
Perhaps	 Lord	 Shiva	 had	 showered	 his	 blessings	 upon	 him	 finally,	 thought	 the
Nishada,	while	Jara	took	a	few	more	steps	backwards.	“I	cannot	be	your	teacher.
The	State	employs	me	to	teach	the	Princes.	I	cannot	take	a	Nishada	as	a	student.

Go	back	to	the	forest,	live	with	your	people,	and	do	your	dharma.	I	have	nothing
to	offer	you.”
Ekalavya’s	heart	sank	and	his	gaze	dropped	to	the	ground	in	defeat.
“But	I	can	give	you	some	sound	advice,”	Drona	continued.	Advice	was	cheap	and
everyone	gave	it	freely	to	others.	Ekalavya	looked	up	to	see	Drona	staring	at	Jara,
who	took	a	few	more	steps	backwards.	“Who	is	that	evil-looking	boy?”
Ekalavya	 glanced	 at	 Jara	 with	 hatred	 and	 contempt.	 “He	 is	 an	 orphan	 and	 has
stuck	with	us	like	a	pest	for	some	time	now.”
“Hmm,	I	thought	so.	He	is	too	dark	to	be	even	a	Nishada.	What	is	his	caste?”
Ekalavya	 wondered	 where	 this	 conversation	 was	 going.	 He	 had	 never	 thought
about	Jara’s	caste.	“I	do	not	know,”	he	mumbled.
“What	caste	are	you?”	Drona	repeated,	this	time	to	Jara,	who	blinked	a	few	times.
He	 did	 not	 know.	 Nobody	 had	 told	 him.	 Nobody	 had	 ever	 asked.	 “Boy,”	 Drona
said	to	Ekalavya,	“beware	of	this	casteless	fellow.	He	is	evil.	He	will	bring	you
bad	luck.	Get	rid	of	him.	You	at	least	have	a	caste.	It	may	be	a	low	one,	but	you
still	 have	 something.	 You	 have	 your	 caste	 dharma.	 He	 has	 nothing.	 No	 values
moor	 him	 to	 life	 and	 he	 will	 stoop	 to	 anything.	 He	 is	 no	 better	 than	 an	 animal.
Look	at	his	evil	face.	As	long	as	he	is	with	you,	you	will	have	no	luck	in	life.	Now
go	 back	 to	 the	 forest	 and	 live	 a	 fulfilling	 life	 befitting	 your	 caste.	 Be	 a	 good
Nishada	 and	 perhaps	 in	 the	 next	 life	 you	 will	 be	 born	 into	 a	 higher	 caste.
Gradually,	through	many	lives	and	by	following	your	caste	dharma	diligently,	you
will	become	a	Brahmin	in	one	of	your	rebirths.	The	Gods	have	ordained	that	you
spend	 this	 life	 as	 a	 Nishada.	 Accept	 what	 has	 been	 ordained.	 Do	 not	 ruin	 it	 by
associating	 with	 low	 people	 like	 that	 boy	 and	 fall	 further.”	 So	 saying,	 Drona
turned	on	his	heel	and	the	Princes	followed	him	back	home.
The	sun	had	almost	disappeared	behind	the	blue	hills	to	the	north	and	twilight	was
spreading	its	quiet	mantle	across	the	world,	ending	another	day.	Ekalavya	felt	the
eyes	of	the	Prince	who	had	given	him	the	mangoes,	boring	into	him.	But	he	did	not
want	to	meet	those	eyes;	he	felt	that	his	whole	world	had	ended.
***

From	a	distance,	Suyodhana	watched	the	Nishada	boy	and	whispered	to	his	friend,
“Your	 father’s	 behaviour	 was	 despicable	 to	 say	 the	 least.”	 Aswathama’s	 heart
sank	when	his	best	friend	pointed	out	the	obvious.
“I	do	not	know	why	he	behaves	like	that,	Suyodhana.	At	home,	he	is	a	strict	father
but	I	always	feel	the	love	he	has	for	me.	He	is	a	different	man	then.	He	treats	my
mother	 with	 love	 and	 affection.	 He	 knows	 she	 secretly	 gives	 some	 of	 his	 hardearned	money	to	her	brother,	Kripa,	who	either	gambles	it	away	or	gives	it	to	his
friend,	 Carvaka,	 who	 works	 among	 the	 poor	 in	 the	 slums	 of	 Hastinapura.
Sometimes,	he	does	beat	me	mercilessly	but	in	the	dead	of	night,	when	he	thinks	I
am	asleep,	he	comes	and	kisses	me	tenderly	and	I	feel	he	will	break	my	heart	with
his	love.	He	is	a	difficult	man	to	understand.	He	left	his	childhood	home	and	all
our	relatives	to	give	us	a	better	life	here.	His	Guru,	Parashurama,	warned	him	that
nothing	 good	 would	 come	 of	 associating	 with	 Kshatriyas	 and	 that	 he	 would	 be
betraying	his	Brahmin	lineage	by	teaching	the	Kuru	Princes	the	science	of	arms.
He	is	a	man	torn	between	his	beliefs	and	his	basic	good	nature,	Suyodhana.	I	hope
that	one	day	his	nature	will	get	the	better	of	his	education	and	he	will	reject	the
philosophy	of	Bhargava	Parashurama	for	good.”
Sushasana	had	been	listening	to	his	brother’s	conversation	with	the	Guru’s	son.	He
laughed	 in	 blatant	 mockery	 and	 said,	 “You	 sissy	 Brahmin	 boy,	 all	 your
justifications	for	your	father’s	behaviour	will	not	change	our	opinion	of	him.	He	is
a	 nut,	 a	 crazy	 man	 with	 fanatical	 ideas	 and	 he	 will	 do	 anything	 to	 win	 Arjuna’s
favour.	All	his	affection	for	you	is	just	put	on.	Sometimes	I	wonder	if	you	are	his
son	or	that	blasted	Pandava	is.	Good	natured,	bah!”
“If	 you	 do	 not	 keep	 your	 ugly	 mouth	 shut,	 you	 glutton,	 I	 will	 knock	 your	 dirty,
yellow	teeth	in,”	Aswathama	shouted	back,	trying	to	punch	Sushasana	in	the	face.
He	would	have	succeeded	had	Suyodhana	not	intervened.
“Come	home	now,”	Drona	turned	back	to	shout	at	his	son,	far	behind.
As	the	three	teenagers	reluctantly	walked	on,	Aswathama	decided	to	confront	his
father	about	his	behaviour	towards	the	poor	Nishada	as	soon	as	he	got	home,	even
at	the	risk	of	facing	that	monumental	temper.
***

A	 star-sprinkled	 sky	 spread	 over	 the	 vast	 landscape.	 The	 lights	 of	 the	 palace	 lit
the	southern	sky	with	a	golden	glow.	A	jungle	fowl	shrieked	from	the	darkness	of
the	woods,	as	if	to	call	the	son	of	the	forest	home.	As	the	figures	of	the	chattering
students	 became	 specks	 of	 darkness	 in	 the	 distance,	 Ekalavya	 stirred.	 His	 heart
was	filled	with	anger	and	hatred.	Jara	was	responsible	for	everything.	He	was	the
harbinger	 of	 bad	 luck,	 the	 casteless,	 dirty,	 smelly	 rat!	 ‘The	 Guru	 is	 right.	 It	 was
when	this	evil	fellow	first	showed	his	face	that	I	lost	my	parents.	When	this	rascal
set	foot	in	my	family,	my	uncle	died	and	left	my	aunt	with	six	mouths	to	feed.	It
was	because	of	him	that	the	Guru	rejected	me.	Look	at	his	ugly	face;	look	at	his
dirty	and	unwashed	body;	look	at	the	dirty	nails	and	the	puss	oozing	from	the	sores
on	his	legs.	Anyone	can	understand	why	he	brings	bad	luck.”
It	was	unfortunate	that	Jara	decided	to	make	fun	of	Ekalavya’s	predicament	just	at
that	 moment.	 He	 howled	 like	 a	 monkey,	 finding	 merriment	 in	 the	 Nishada	 boy’s
broken	dreams.	“Ha	ha	ha…	I	told	you	so!	It	serves	you	right.	You	did	not	listen
to	me.	You	thought	he	would	accept	your	ugly	face	when	he	had	refused	even	that
Suta	boy	with	a	rich	and	important	man’s	recommendation.	What	a	joke!”
Jara	 yelled	 as	 the	 first	 stone	 hit	 his	 nose.	 The	 surprised	 cry	 soon	 turned	 into
screams	 of	 terror	 as	 more	 and	 more	 stones	 found	 their	 mark.	 Jara	 clutched	 his
bleeding	 nose	 and	 ran.	 Ekalavya	 chased	 after	 him.	 With	 a	 final	 leap,	 he	 caught
hold	of	the	terrified,	black	urchin.	He	beat	and	kicked	Jara	with	all	the	anger	and
frustration	 he	 felt	 and	 only	 stopped	 when	 he	 could	 not	 bear	 the	 pain	 in	 his	 own
limbs.	 He	 left	 the	 profusely	 bleeding	 boy	 to	 die	 like	 a	 street	 dog	 and	 sought
asylum	in	the	darkness	of	the	jungle.
The	 skies	 darkened	 with	 clouds	 and	 it	 started	 to	 rain.	 Still	 the	 boy	 did	 not	 stir.
Rain	pounded	the	red	earth	for	a	few	hours	and	then	became	an	impotent	drizzle
just	before	dawn.	When	the	sky	turned	a	dull	grey	in	the	east,	the	bundle	of	ill	luck
whimpered	and	rose	up	on	all	fours.	Somewhere	in	the	womb	of	the	forest,	a	wild
beast	 howled,	 mourning	 the	 passing	 of	 the	 night.	 The	 stray	 dogs	 of	 Hastinapura
answered,	their	cries	echoing	on	all	sides.	Jara	stood	up	on	his	weak	legs.	Blood
mixed	with	water	to	form	a	dirty	puddle	at	his	feet.	He	looked	at	his	battered	body
and	an	animal	cry	rose	in	his	throat.	He	howled	again.	This	time,	from	a	distance,
perhaps	from	the	woods,	the	hills,	or	the	narrow	pathways	of	the	city,	something
answered.	 In	 that	 moment,	 the	 little	 boy	 died	 and	 a	 beast	 was	 born.	 There	 was
only	Jara	and	his	hunger,	nothing	else	mattered.	No	taboos,	no	scriptures,	no	caste
rules	were	going	to	stand	between	him	and	his	hunger.	No	God	was	going	to	keep

him	from	surviving.	Sheer	animal	instinct	powered	the	beast.
Jara	 looked	 at	 the	 jungle,	 which	 held	 the	 secret	 armies	 of	 the	 Nagas,	 where	 he
knew	 his	 hero	 Takshaka	 was	 preparing	 to	 take	 on	 the	 might	 of	 Hastinapura	 one
day.	He	thought	of	the	men	and	women	who	were	willing	to	die	for	the	glory	of
their	cause	under	the	charismatic	leader.	Then	he	looked	at	the	sprawling	capital
with	 its	 majestic	 palaces	 and	 dark	 slums,	 where	 men	 and	 women	 like	 him	 did
whatever	they	had	to,	to	survive.	Fate	was	offering	him	two	choices	–	a	glorious
death	 and	 heroism	 under	 Takshaka	 or	 mundane	 survival	 in	 the	 teeming	 slums	 of
Hastinapura.	As	the	first	rays	of	the	sun	touched	the	wet	earth	and	the	forest	burst
into	a	cacophony	of	birdsong,	Jara	made	his	choice.	He	chose	mundane	survival
over	spectacular	death	and	began	walking	towards	Hastinapura.
***

Ekalavya	 returned	 to	 the	 training	 ground	 early	 the	 next	 morning.	 He	 was	 feeling
depressed	and	guilty	about	his	behaviour	towards	Jara.	He	found	the	spot	where
he	 had	 left	 Jara	 for	 dead,	 but	 the	 boy	 had	 gone.	 Ekalavya	 sat	 on	 the	 grass
wondering	what	might	have	happened	to	the	idiot.	As	the	morning	matured,	he	saw
Drona	in	the	distance,	leading	the	Princes	to	the	ground.	Ekalavya	ran	for	cover	in
the	 woods	 and	 disappeared.	 From	 his	 hiding	 place,	 he	 watched	 the	 training,
thinking	this	was	another	way	of	acquiring	the	knowledge	he	desired.
That	 was	 the	 beginning.	 From	 that	 day	 on,	 he	 hid	 in	 the	 woods	 and	 learnt	 by
observation.	 After	 the	 classes	 were	 over	 and	 the	 Princes	 had	 left	 for	 their
comfortable	dwellings,	the	 son	 of	the	forest	practised	what	he	had	seen.	After	a
few	 months	 of	 dedicated	 hard	 work,	 he	 found	 he	 could	 hit	 targets	 as	 easily	 as
Arjuna.	When	an	arrow	was	shot	with	skill,	it	did	not	ask	whether	the	hands	that
held	the	bow	were	those	of	an	Untouchable	or	a	Prince.	They	pierced	their	targets
without	prejudice.	The	daily	practice	at	night	gave	the	Nishada	an	advantage	over
his	royal	competitor	–	it	made	him	an	expert	at	shooting	in	the	darkness.	Ekalavya
was	like	one	possessed.	He	barely	managed	a	few	hours’	sleep	before	dawn.
The	 days	 were	 spent	 assimilating	 knowledge	 and	 endlessly	 practising	 what	 he
saw.	At	first,	he	missed	Jara’s	companionship	but	soon	got	over	it.	After	a	year
had	 passed,	 it	 was	 as	 if	 Jara	 had	 never	 existed.	 Jara’s	 disappearance	 coincided
with	 Ekalavya’s	 luck	 turning.	 With	 no	 one	 to	 mock	 or	 tell	 him	 that	 it	 was
impossible	 for	 an	 Untouchable	 to	 become	 a	 great	 warrior,	 Ekalavya’s	 natural

confidence	 reasserted	 itself	 and	 he	 soon	 became	 a	 formidable	 hunter.	 Food	 was
plentiful	as	he	could	hunt	game	with	skill	and	stealth	and	his	family	did	not	face
hunger	again	for	a	long	time.
***

Purochana,	the	Chief	Inspector	of	City	Hygiene,	pressed	a	scarf	over	his	nose.	The
stench	was	unbearable.	He	had	left	the	palace	with	its	cloying	smell	of	incense,
and	now	entered	a	world	of	filth,	where	the	streets	coiled	in	on	themselves	like
leeches;	the	open	drains	overflowed,	and	the	narrow	pavements	served	as	garbage
dumps.	 Purochana	 knew	 this	 world	 was	 far	 removed	 from	 what	 the	 Hastinapura
rulers	wished	to	believe	about	their	kingdom.	The	other	Hastinapura,	of	luxurious
villas,	 broad,	 tree-shaded	 avenues,	 golden	 temples,	 swanky	 shops	 that	 sold
diamonds	and	silks,	and	noblemen	and	beautiful	women,	could	well	have	existed
on	 another	 planet.	 This	 was	 the	 dark	 underbelly	 of	 India’s	 cities,	 where	 the
majority	lived.	The	other	was	just	a	charade,	as	hollow	and	fake	as	the	promises
made	by	the	rulers	to	the	ruled.
People,	 carts,	 vendors,	 pigs,	 cows,	 goats	 and	 horses,	 all	 jostled	 for	 space.	 The
streets	had	a	life	of	their	own,	pushing,	pulling,	screeching,	blaring,	and	dodging.
They	 pulsed	 to	 their	 own	 rhythm.	 Purochana	 wiped	 the	 sweat	 from	 his	 face	 and
waited	 to	 catch	 his	 breath,	 leaning	 on	 the	 stump	 of	 a	 lamppost	 that	 had	 been
broken	 years	 before	 he	 was	 even	 born.	 Rats	 scurried	 over	 his	 feet	 and	 he	 leapt
back	in	horror.	A	dirty	urchin	grinned	at	his	discomfiture	and	a	street	dog	barked
at	 him.	 He	 resumed	 his	 walk,	 dodging	 carts	 and	 pushing	 the	 scarred	 hands	 of
beggars	 away.	 Cursing	 the	 rude	 vendors	 who	 thrust	 their	 fares	 in	 his	 face,	 he
moved	 along,	 using	 his	 shoulders	 and	 hands	 to	 swim	 through	 the	 crowd.	 He
averted	 his	 gaze	 from	 a	 couple	 of	 men	 who	 were	 urinating	 against	 a	 wall	 with
eyes	closed.	A	few	steps	away,	people	fought	for	the	hot	savouries	being	fried	in
days-old	oil.
Purochana	had	walked	these	streets	many	times,	but	they	always	confused	him.	He
could	not	stop	to	ask	anyone	the	way.	Today’s	mission	was	dangerous.	He	paused
again,	trying	to	recall	the	direction	he	had	to	take.	Somewhere	to	the	left,	a	temple
bell	chimed	and	the	faint	sounds	of	chanting	floated	towards	him.	No,	it	was	not
that	way.	He	turned	right	and	continued	walking,	cutting	across	the	market	where
clerks,	 servants,	 porters,	 artisans,	 cart	 drivers,	 masons,	 potters,	 gardeners,	 and
many	others	filled	the	streets	from	dawn	to	dusk,	haggling	over	prices	and	winning

or	losing	their	insignificant	daily	battles.	Purochana	owed	his	job	to	these	people.
Without	them,	the	well-kept	streets	of	central	Hastinapura	would	have	turned	into
filthy	thoroughfares.	The	manicured	gardens	and	large	homes	would	have	ceased
to	exist.
On	the	rare	occasions	he	was	invited	to	the	parties	of	the	rich,	he	had	heard	the
elegant	ladies	complaining	about	their	city	and	Government	servants.	Why	doesn’t
the	 Government	 demolish	 the	 slums?	 They	 are	 an	 affront	 to	 the	 eyes.	 He	 had
heard	that	comment	from	a	lady	who	kept	caressing	the	string	of	diamonds	around
her	 neck.	 He	 had	 been	 tempted	 to	 retort,	 ‘You	 bitch,	 without	 those	 slums,	 how
would	your	chariot	driver	or	gardener	survive	on	the	meagre	wages	you	pay	them?
If	the	slums	vanished,	would	you	even	have	a	maid?’
But	he	had	not	uttered	a	word,	simply	nodding	his	head	in	sympathy.	He	could	not
risk	talking	back	to	the	wives	of	influential	men.	The	men	were	worse.	They	spoke
of	various	methods	of	eradicating	this	blemish	from	their	land	and	wondered	why
the	 Government	 did	 not	 have	 the	 wisdom	 they	 displayed	 after	 two	 pitchers	 of
wine.	 He	 chuckled	 at	 the	 thought	 of	 all	 the	 people	 who	 hated	 their	 country	 in
private	and	cursed	Bhishma	or	the	King,	and	sometimes	even	the	foreign	woman
who	was	their	Queen,	for	dragging	down	their	great	civilization.	At	the	same	time,
they	 defended	 the	 greatness	 of	 their	 country	 and	 religion	 against	 the	 criticism	 of
outsiders;	with	a	fanaticism	that	bordered	on	insanity.	They	were	easily	offended
by	 the	 wide-eyed	 wonder	 foreigners	 exhibited	 at	 the	 teeming	 poverty	 and	 the
glittering	riches	of	this	ancient	land.	They	wondered	why	those	materialistic	and
cultureless	 barbarians	 did	 not	 restrict	 their	 attention	 to	 the	 exquisitely	 beautiful
temples	and	palaces.	Everyone	knew	foreigners	had	little	by	way	of	family	values,
besides	 being	 immoral	 and	 unclean.	 The	 people	 of	 Hastinapura	 did	 not	 need	 a
certificate	 of	 greatness	 from	 them.	 Nevertheless,	 it	 irked	 the	 elite	 that	 these
foreigners	did	not	see	the	inherent	spirituality	in	their	music	and	art	or	understand
the	scientific	basis	of	every	ritual	and	superstition.	Why	did	they	insist	on	going
about	the	stinking	slums	and	talking	about	the	Shudras	who	lived	there?	Why	did
they	even	care?
The	people	of	Hastinapura	were	not	alone	in	harbouring	such	lofty	thoughts.	The
clothing,	language	and	accents	changed,	but	the	ideas	of	the	elite	and	comfortably
rich,	remained	the	same	everywhere	–	whether	in	Kashi,	Kanchipuram,	Muzaris,
or	 Dwaraka.	 Irrespective	 of	 what	 foreigners	 thought,	 the	 diversity	 of	 India	 was
merely	 peripheral.	 Her	 core	 retained	 a	 surprising	 unity	 of	 thought	 and	 deed.

Purochana	 laughed	 aloud.	 There	 was	 a	 world	 even	 grimier	 than	 this,	 the
bureaucrat	 thought.	 An	 invisible	 world,	 akin	 to	 what	 one	 sees	 when	 one	 lifts	 a
heavy	 stone	 in	 the	 garden.	 Life	 teems	 under	 it,	 indifferent	 to	 its	 surroundings.
Vermin,	 worms,	 leeches	 and	 ants,	 all	 thrive	 there.	 Mostly	 they	 are	 harmless
creatures,	 which	 emerge	 in	 the	 dead	 of	 night	 to	 find	 sustenance.	 Occasionally,
there	is	a	scorpion	amongst	them,	with	a	poisonous	sting	in	its	tail.
Shakuni’s	instructions	had	been	clear.	Purochana	was	to	meet	one	such	scorpion,
who	had	a	lethal	sting.	The	name	once	sent	shock	waves	through	those	who	heard
it.	Both	in	the	dusty	streets	of	Hastinapura	as	well	as	in	the	opulent	homes	of	the
rich	–	the	name	Durjaya	was	a	conversation	stopper.	He	was	capable	of	hushing
voices	 without	 even	 being	 present.	 Excitement	 and	 fear	 peppered	 small	 talk.
Durjaya	had	once	lorded	over	the	kingdom	of	human	vermin.	A	tyrant,	he	ruled	an
empire	 of	 beggars,	 prostitutes	 and	 petty	 thieves	 in	 the	 invisible	 underworld	 of
Hastinapura.	Crime	was	his	weapon	and	misery	his	shield.	An	ambitious	man,	he
soon	found	that	the	illicit	brewing	of	arrack,	controlling	a	gang	of	pickpockets	and
petty	 thieves,	 skimming	 from	 professional	 beggars,	 and	 a	 prostitution	 racket,
yielded	 only	 so	 much.	 He	 aspired	 to	 bigger	 things	 in	 life.	 A	 few	 years	 ago,	 the
special	guards	of	Hastinapura	had	almost	crushed	his	empire	of	darkness.	Durjaya
had	 grown	 back	 to	 strength	 in	 the	 chaotic	 time	 of	 Hastinapura	 fighting	 a	 bloody
war	 with	 the	 Southern	 Confederate.	 However,	 once	 the	 peace	 treaty	 had	 been
signed	 with	 Parashurama,	 Bhishma	 turned	 his	 attention	 back	 to	 the	 kingdom	 and
times	 had	 become	 tough	 for	 men	 like	 him	 once	 again.	 Bhishma	 had	 personally
camped	 in	 the	 dirty	 streets	 of	 the	 city	 and	 decimated	 the	 crime	 lord’s	 empire.
Durjaya	had	crawled	into	hiding,	and	waited	in	darkness	for	the	wheel	to	turn.
Purochana’s	 mission	 was	 to	 bring	 the	 scorpion	 out	 and	 give	 more	 power	 to	 his
sting.	 Was	 this	 the	 house?	 The	 fat	 man	 hesitated,	 adjusting	 his	 headgear	 and
drawing	himself	up	to	his	full	height.	He	checked	the	dagger	hidden	in	the	folds	of
his	waistcloth.	Not	that	it	would	do	him	any	good	if	the	crime	lord	decided	to	do
away	with	him.	For	a	fleeting	moment,	the	image	of	his	bloated	body	caught	in	the
reeds	 beside	 the	 Ganga,	 flashed	 through	 his	 mind.	 He	 pushed	 away	 such
inauspicious	thoughts.	He	had	to	play	it	cool.	He	softly	tapped	at	the	dilapidated
door.	It	creaked	open	reluctantly.	He	could	see	eyes	staring	at	him.	Purochana	had
to	breathe	through	his	mouth	in	order	to	shut	out	the	stink	that	escaped	through	the
partly	 open	 door.	 “I	 am	 Purochana,	 Chief	 Inspector	 of	 City	 Hygiene,”	 he	 said
officiously.

The	door	shut	with	a	bang.	The	entire	building	shook	with	the	impact.	Purochana
stood	in	the	street,	unsure	of	what	to	do.	As	he	was	about	to	turn	away,	the	door
opened	again	and	the	crooked	hand	of	a	leper	held	out	some	money.	He	had	won
the	first	round.	The	fool	was	afraid	enough	to	offer	him	a	bribe.	Keeping	his	face
grave,	Purochana	took	the	money,	as	if	bestowing	a	favour.	“Tell	Durjaya	that	his
luck	is	about	to	change.	I	want	to	see	him.”	The	door	closed	again	but	this	time
Purochana	was	sure	he	would	be	invited	inside	soon.	He	was	right.
When	he	saw	Durjaya	in	the	flesh,	Purochana	was	disappointed.	The	man	looked
small	and	ordinary,	with	a	soft	moustache	and	dark	hair.	He	had	expected	a	raving
villain.	 The	 fat	 official	 looked	 at	 the	 pathetic	 condition	 of	 the	 crime	 lord’s
dwelling	 –	 the	 cobwebs,	 broken	 chairs,	 torn	 carpet.	 A	 musty	 smell	 pervaded
everything.	Purochana	smiled.	This	was	going	to	be	easier	than	he	had	thought.
“I	have	an	offer	you	will	not	be	able	to	resist,”	he	said	pompously	and	waited.
Durjaya	 continued	 to	 sit	 with	 a	 blank	 expression	 on	 his	 face.	 Purochana’s	 heart
skipped	a	beat.	It	had	been	a	mistake	to	look	into	those	glassy	eyes.	He	wanted	to
get	out	and	go	back	to	his	office.	That	foreigner	and	his	blasted	plans!
“Tell	me	about	the	offer,”	the	scorpion	said	simply.
Purochana	forgot	what	he	had	come	to	say.	“Hmmm…	you	must	pray	facing	West,
you	and	all	your	supporters…”	Purochana	cursed	himself.	That	bit	was	to	come
last.	He	saw	Durjaya’s	eyes	expand	in	disbelief.	Before	he	could	be	thrown	out,
Purochana	pulled	himself	together	and	sat	down.	He	deliberately	crossed	his	legs
and	 kept	 his	 hands	 in	 his	 lap	 so	 they	 would	 not	 shake.	 He	 no	 longer	 felt	 like	 a
supplicant.
“Do	you	wish	to	build	back	your	empire?	Do	you	want	a	stake	in	smuggling	arms
and	drugs	from	Gandhara	and	selling	them	to	the	Nagas?	Do	you	want	to	become
the	 most	 feared	 man	 in	 the	 country	 again,	 Durjaya?”	 Purochana	 watched	 for	 any
change	of	expression	in	the	crime	lord’s	face.
Slowly	a	smile	cracked	Durjaya’s	lips.	“Are	you	drunk	or	just	insane?	How	can	a
mere	city	inspector	help	me	to	do	all	these	things?	Take	your	bribe	and	get	lost.”
Durjaya	stood	up	from	his	broken	chair.

Purochana	stood	up	too	and	as	Durjaya	walked	away,	he	said,	“You	are	being	too
hasty,	Durjaya.	Have	you	never	heard	of	Shakuni?”
That	stopped	Durjaya	in	his	tracks.	“The	Prince	of	Gandhara?”	Durjaya	asked	in
surprise.
Purochana’s	fear	fell	away.	Durjaya	ordered	wine	and	a	boy	came	with	a	pitcher.
Purochana	 discussed	 the	 details	 as	 the	 two	 men	 matched	 each	 other	 glass	 for
glass.	The	boy	came	many	times	with	snacks	and	more	drinks.
“I	have	seen	him	somewhere,”	Purochana	said	fuzzily,	looking	at	the	serving	boy.
“I	give	employment	to	people	the	Government	rejects.	I	am	a	seller	of	dreams.”
Durjaya’s	 speech	 was	 remarkably	 clear	 still.	 “You	 bloody	 Government	 servants
do	 not	 care	 about	 them.	 I	 give	 people	 instant	 justice,	 whereas	 you	 take	 years	 to
settle	even	one	case.	You	deny	education	to	poor	boys	and	I	keep	such	boys	from
dying.	Idiots	like	this	boy	Jara,	come	in	hordes	from	the	dark	hinterland	to	this	city
of	riches,	dreaming	of	the	day	they	will	return	to	their	villages	in	a	golden	chariot.
Every	 bastard	 wants	 to	 go	 home	 with	 a	 train	 of	 servants	 and	 be	 the	 envy	 of	 the
fools	 who	 have	 not	 dared	 leave	 the	 village.	 I	 play	 on	 their	 dreams,”	 Durjaya
laughed.
“What	about	girls?”	Purochana	asked	hopefully.
“Ha	 ha…	 girls!	 They	 are	 different.	 This	 is	 a	 city	 of	 dreams,	 my	 friend.	 People
come	 here	 to	 live	 their	 dreams.	 Girls	 run	 away	 from	 poverty	 to	 the	 glitter	 of
Hastinapura,	the	city	of	art,	dance	and	poetry.	What	beautiful	bullshit!	They	come
here	 dreaming	 of	 becoming	 courtesans	 in	 the	 palaces	 of	 the	 princes	 or	 rich
merchants.	Only	handfuls	achieve	their	dream.	The	rest	end	up	with	gangs	like	us,
or	on	the	streets,	pedalling	their	only	asset.	When	they	become	old,	they	become
beggars.	One	day	they	fall	down	and	die.	I	have	uses	for	dreamers	of	either	sex,
Purochana.	I	had	many	of	them	in	my	gang	before	that	cursed	Shudra,	Vidhura,	let
loose	his	police	on	me.”
“Everything	will	change	now,	my	friend,”	Purochana	said,	pleased	by	the	glitter	in
the	crime	lord’s	eyes.
“Yes,	you	have	brought	me	luck.	Let	us	drink	to	your	health.”

As	the	crime	lord	lost	himself	in	drink,	Purochana	kept	looking	at	the	small	boy
who	flitted	in	and	out	of	the	room.

10	NAGAS
ONE	DAY,	EKALAVYA’S	HUNTING	HAD	 taken	him	deep	into	the	forest	to	an	area	he	had

never	ventured	before.	A	dull	moon	glowed	over	the	forest	canopy	and	made	leafy
mosaic	patterns	on	the	ground.	As	he	reached	a	mountain	stream,	Ekalavya	heard	a
low	 whistle.	 He	 was	 instantly	 alert.	 It	 sounded	 suspiciously	 like	 an	 alarm	 or	 a
signal.	 He	 hid	 behind	 a	 tree	 and	 listened,	 but	 nothing	 moved.	 Ekalavya	 waited
anxiously.	Though	he	could	detect	no	movement,	all	his	instincts	signalled	danger.
He	sensed	a	presence	nearby.	Something	or	somebody	evil	was	watching	him.	He
could	 feel	 it	 in	 every	 nerve.	 He	 waited	 for	 whoever	 was	 hiding	 in	 the	 deep
shadows	to	make	the	first	move	but	not	a	leaf	stirred.
‘Perhaps	I	am	unnecessarily	jumpy,’	thought	Ekalavya,	and	decided	to	move	from
his	hiding	place.	But	his	body	did	not	react	as	quickly	as	his	instincts.	Taking	two
steps	forward,	he	found	himself	in	a	trap,	hanging	upside	down	ten	feet	from	the
ground.	 As	 he	 tried	 to	 free	 his	 legs,	 he	 saw	 scores	 of	 men	 surround	 him	 with
flaming	torches.
A	 dark	 middle-aged	 man	 approached	 and	 peered	 into	 his	 eyes.	 The	 man	 had	 a
pockmarked	 face	 and	 an	 ugly	 scar	 on	 his	 forehead.	 He	 had	 only	 one	 eye	 and
walked	with	a	limp.	“Welcome	to	the	world	of	the	Nagas,”	he	said	with	a	smile
that	 showed	 a	 huge	 gap	 in	 his	 pointed	 front	 teeth,	 which	 looked	 like	 fangs.	 The
long	thin	face	and	the	glassy	left	eye	gave	him	the	appearance	of	a	serpent.	“Cut
him	down,”	the	man	commanded.
Ekalavya	 shuddered.	 This	 was	 the	 end;	 he	 thought	 and	 braced	 himself	 to	 be
pierced	with	a	sword.	One	of	the	men	cut	the	ropes	that	held	him	upside	down	and
Ekalavya	 fell	 on	 his	 face.	 He	 heard	 laughter	 as	 he	 tried	 to	 get	 up.	 Pain	 seared
through	his	body.	There	was	blood	on	his	face.	Strong	hands	lifted	him.	When	he
tried	to	writhe	free,	they	merely	laughed.	Torches	flickered	and	shadows	danced
around	them,	making	grotesque	patterns	in	the	small	clearing.	The	men	walked	to	a
stream	and	threw	Ekalavya	in.	The	water	felt	icy	cold	on	his	burning	skin.	When
they	pulled	him	out,	he	gave	up	the	struggle	and	walked	on	between	his	captors	up
a	steep	hill.	One	of	the	men	cleared	the	undergrowth	with	a	sharp	scythe	while	the

rest	followed	him	in	single	file.
No	one	spoke.	The	silence	was	getting	on	Ekalavya’s	nerves.	“Who	are	you?”	he
finally	gathered	the	courage	to	ask.
“The	King	of	Hastinapura,”	replied	the	one-eyed	leader.	His	companions	laughed
uproariously.	“Well,	I	am	only	half-blind,	so	I	am	only	half	a	King.”	Despite	his
fear,	 Ekalavya	 found	 himself	 smiling	 in	 amusement.	 “Son,	 I	 am	 the	 dreaded
Kaliya.	You	may	have	heard	stories	about	me.	I	was	defeated	by	Krishna.	Many
sing	about	his	valour	in	defeating	a	thousand-hooded	snake.	I	am	that	snake.”
They	kept	walking	until	Ekalavya	saw	a	clearing	ahead.	His	heart	leapt	when	he
saw	Takshaka,	with	a	dozen	warriors	in	fierce	Naga	costume	standing	around	him.
An	old	man	sat	close	to	the	fire.	There	were	many	thatched	huts	around.	Women
sat	in	a	group,	talking	animatedly,	some	rocking	babies.	Infants	cried	and	children
ran	 around	 screaming	 and	 shouting.	 Some	 young	 men	 were	 singing	 and	 dancing,
trying	 to	 impress	 the	 young	 girls	 who	 sat	 in	 another	 group.	 Other	 men	 were
brewing	hooch	and	roasting	meat.	It	did	not	look	like	the	dreaded	rebel	camp	of
Takshaka.
Takshaka	 stood	 up	 when	 he	 saw	 the	 group	 approach.	 Kaliya	 bowed.	 Ekalavya
stood	still,	undecided	whether	to	bow	to	Takshaka	or	not.	Finally,	he	bowed	and	a
smile	flickered	on	the	handsome	face	of	the	Naga	leader.	“Oh	Shankara!	Whom	do
we	have	here?	Ekalavya,	welcome	to	the	humble	abode	of	the	Nagas.”
The	 old	 man	 near	 the	 fire	 looked	 up	 at	 Ekalavya	 and	 then	 quickly	 looked	 away
again,	 shaking	 his	 head.	 Takshaka	 smiled	 and	 stepped	 forward	 to	 hug	 Ekalavya,
who	stood	stiffly.
“Why	have	you	brought	me	here?”	Ekalavya’s	tone	betrayed	more	irritation	than
fear.
“Because	this	is	where	you	belong.	Welcome	home,	Ekalavya.”	Takshaka’s	smile
broadened	into	a	grin.
A	few	of	the	children	found	the	newcomer	more	interesting	than	their	games	and
stood	 around	 him	 in	 open	 curiosity.	 A	 few	 brave	 ones	 even	 managed	 to	 pinch
Ekalavya	and	giggle	at	his	embarrassment	and	irritation.

“So,	was	he	difficult	to	catch,	Kaliya?	You	have	been	trailing	him	for	how	many
days...	fifteen…	twenty?”
Kaliya	 stared	 at	 Ekalavya.	 “It	 has	 been	 more	 than	 a	 month,	 Takshaka.	 He	 is	 a
natural	warrior,	always	alert.	It	was	difficult	for	us	to	remain	hidden.	He	nearly
found	us	a	couple	of	times.	His	marksmanship	is	impressive	and	his	perception	of
his	surroundings	good.	He	can	be	trained	to	become	a	great	warrior.”	The	old	man
sitting	near	the	fire	looked	up	in	mild	curiosity.
“Can	 someone	 tell	 me	 why	 I	 have	 been	 dragged	 to	 this	 place?”	 Ekalavya	 was
close	to	losing	his	temper	but	the	sharpness	of	his	tone	did	not	have	any	impact	on
the	group.	A	few	snickered	and	somebody	shoved	the	Nishada	from	behind.
“All	in	good	time,	comrade,	all	in	its	own	time!	Have	patience.	You	are	here	for	a
purpose.	 I	 have	 great	 plans	 for	 you.	 I	 have	 seen	 your	 skill	 with	 the	 bow.
Moreover,	you	are	one	of	us.	We	are	fighting	for	a	great	cause.	Strong,	young	men
like	you	will	take	the	revolution	forward.”	Takshaka	caught	the	eye	of	the	old	man
and	abruptly	stopped	his	rhetoric.	“Aswasena!”	he	called.	A	young	man	stepped
forward	and	bowed.	“Ekalavya,	this	is	Aswasena.	He	will	take	care	of	your	needs
for	now	and	maybe	in	future	too.”
Their	conversation	was	interrupted	by	a	commotion	at	the	periphery	of	the	village.
Naga	warriors	were	dragging	in	a	group	of	people	bound	with	ropes.	The	entire
village	 thronged	 around	 to	 witness	 the	 spectacle.	 Except	 for	 one	 or	 two,	 who
looked	a	little	better	off,	the	captives	belonged	to	the	striving	lower	middle	class.
They	 were	 unimaginative,	 petty,	 hardworking,	 honest	 city	 folk	 –	 the	 rulers	 of
boredom	 and	 monotony,	 tyrants	 in	 their	 humble	 homes	 but	 meek	 and	 submissive
outside.	There	was	a	look	of	pure	terror	in	their	eyes.	The	villagers	were	shoving
them,	 the	 women	 competing	 with	 each	 other	 to	 pull	 the	 hair	 of	 their	 unfortunate
counterparts,	 while	 the	 children	 gleefully	 punched	 the	 captives.	 Mangy	 dogs	 ran
with	the	crowd,	barking,	snapping	and	adding	to	the	cacophony.	Someone	grabbed
a	baby	from	the	arms	of	a	captured	woman	and	for	some	time	the	infant	was	tossed
around	by	the	mob.	The	agonized	screams	of	the	terrified	mother	drove	the	crowd
into	frenzy.
Takshaka	and	Aswasena	ran	towards	the	mob.	As	Ekalavya	was	about	to	follow,
the	 old	 man	 near	 the	 fire	 caught	 him	 by	 the	 wrist.	 “Escape	 now!	 This	 is	 a
dangerous	place.	That	man	is	mad	and	he	has	made	our	people	insane.	If	you	do

not	get	out	now,	you	will	never	be	able	to	do	so	in	future.	Get	out	and	run	before
you	too,	get	sucked	into	this.”
Ekalavya	 looked	 in	 surprise	 at	 the	 old	 man.	 He	 had	 lost	 most	 of	 his	 teeth	 and
possessed	a	few	tufts	of	white	hair	on	his	head.	He	looked	frail	but	it	was	not	the
weakness	of	age	but	weariness	with	life.	“Sir,	who	are	you?	Why	do	you	want	to
stop	me	from	joining	Takshaka?”	Ekalavya	asked.
“Son,	 do	 not	 play	 with	 fire.	 Leave	 before	 hatred	 poisons	 your	 mind	 and	 rage
makes	you	blind.	The	world	is	not	such	a	bad	place	as	Takshaka	makes	it	out	to
be.	Neither	is	it	going	to	be	heaven	when	he	becomes	King.	You	are	young.	Do	not
get	swayed	by	peddlers	of	impossible	dreams.	Get	out	now!”
“Who	are	you,	Sir?”	Ekalavya	asked	again	but	the	old	man	remained	silent.
The	mob	had	been	brought	under	control	and	the	prisoners	moved	to	the	centre	of
the	 village.	 Takshaka	 sat	 on	 a	 makeshift	 platform	 made	 of	 bamboo	 while	 the
captives	stood	tied	together	in	a	huddle	a	few	feet	away.	It	looked	like	some	sort
of	 trial.	 The	 villagers	 sat	 on	 their	 haunches	 all	 around.	 A	 few	 excited	 ones
continued	 to	 shout	 abuse.	 Aswasena,	 the	 young	 Naga	 who	 was	 to	 be	 Ekalavya’s
guide,	came	running	towards	him	through	the	crowd.
Once	again	the	old	man	hissed,	“Don’t	you	have	any	sense,	you	fool?	Run	now!
Run	or	your	life	will	never	be	the	same	again.”
Ekalavya	 did	 not	 know	 what	 to	 do.	 A	 part	 of	 his	 mind	 told	 him	 to	 follow	 the
advice	 of	 the	 old	 man,	 but	 minute	 by	 minute,	 curiosity	 was	 getting	 the	 better	 of
sense.
Aswasena	stopped	near	Ekalavya,	panting	with	exertion	and	excitement.	“Come,
the	leader	wishes	you	to	witness	the	trial	of	the	traitors.”
Ekalavya	hesitated	for	a	moment,	looking	at	the	old	man	who	sat	shaking	his	head
in	 despair,	 and	 decided	 to	 ignore	 him.	 Perhaps	 the	 man	 was	 insane,	 thought	 the
Nishada,	as	he	followed	the	young	Naga	to	witness	the	trial.	“Who	is	that	old	man,
Aswasena?”	he	asked	his	companion.
“Oh,	do	not	mind	him.	He	is	mad.	He	was	once	the	King	of	the	Nagas.	His	name	is
Vasuki.	He	was	the	fool	who	frittered	away	our	inheritance	and	lost	our	kingdom.

He	 keeps	 rambling	 on	 about	 peace	 and	 such.	 Our	 leader	 has	 been	 generous	 in
sparing	 his	 life.	 He	 holds	 the	 mad	 Vasuki	 up	 as	 an	 example	 of	 what	 Nagas	 will
become	if	we	are	not	willing	to	fight	for	the	cause.	The	man	is	a	joke.	Do	not	take
his	ramblings	seriously.”
They	 had	 reached	 the	 place	 where	 the	 trial	 was	 to	 be	 held.	 Takshaka	 motioned
Ekalavya	to	take	a	seat	on	the	wooden	log	where	some	men	were	already	sitting.
They	 moved	 a	 little	 to	 allow	 Ekalavya	 to	 take	 his	 place.	 Kaliya	 stood	 with	 his
naked	sword	resting	on	his	right	shoulder,	smiling.	Ekalavya	shuddered	at	the	look
of	glee	in	the	Naga’s	eyes.
A	middle-aged	man	stepped	out	of	the	mob	and	suddenly	a	hush	fell.	He	bowed	to
Takshaka	and	the	group	of	men	sitting	to	Ekalavya’s	right.	“Honourable	People’s
Court,	 we	 have	 here	 the	 traitors	 who	 betrayed	 our	 great	 cause.	 We	 are	 here	 to
decide	 their	 punishment.	 On	 the	 far	 right,	 we	 have	 the	 man	 who	 has	 done	 the
greatest	 harm	 to	 our	 cause.	 Honourable	 Court,	 behold	 Shivarama	 Charana,	 the
renegade	Brahmin	of	Suryanagara	village,	a	suburb	of	Hastinapura.”
An	old	man	was	shoved	forward.	Tall	and	lean,	he	held	his	head	high	with	pride.
There	was	no	look	of	fear	in	his	eyes	as	he	gazed	at	Takshaka	with	contempt.
“Bow	to	the	People’s	Court,”	barked	one	of	the	guards.	When	the	old	man	showed
no	inclination	to	do	so,	the	guard	hit	him	with	the	hilt	of	his	sword.	The	man	still
stood,	 unflinching,	 not	 even	 bothering	 to	 wipe	 the	 blood	 flowing	 from	 his
forehead.
“This	 man,	 instead	 of	 following	 his	 caste	 profession,	 led	 an	 immoral	 life	 till	 he
was	sixty.	He	inherited	huge	tracts	of	farmland,	which	his	ancestors	had	cheated
from	 the	 Nagas	 a	 few	 generations	 before.	 He	 has	 always	 been	 cruel	 to	 his
workers,	 abusing	 them.	 His	 labourers	 escaped	 from	 his	 tyranny	 and	 formed	 our
first	 band	 of	 soldiers	 under	 our	 honourable	 leader,	 Nahusha.	 This	 crooked	 man
understood	we	were	winning	so	for	the	last	fifteen	years	he	has	acted	as	though	he
is	the	most	benevolent	man	on	earth.	He	has	conspired	with	the	evil	Balarama	of
the	 Yadava	 clan	 to	 start	 training	 centres	 for	 various	 crafts	 in	 his	 village.	 He	 is
trying	 to	 take	 the	 people	 away	 from	 the	 cause	 by	 enticing	 them	 into	 crafts	 and
trade.	 The	 government	 has	 made	 substantial	 grants	 to	 him,	 which	 further	 proves
the	conspiracy.

“Another	 strange	 fact,	 yet	 not	 so	 strange	 if	 we	 understand	 the	 true	 nature	 of	 our
enemies,	 is	 that	 the	 man	 gives	 equal	 importance	 to	 different	 men.	 The	 list	 of
people	involved	in	undermining	the	people’s	war	is	truly	astounding.	It	includes
Balarama,	the	man	who	acts	like	a	saint;	Bhishma,	the	arrogant	Kuru	Regent;	the
crazy	 Brahmin,	 Kripa;	 the	 atheist,	 Carvaka;	 renegade	 Nagas,	 and	 so	 on.	 The
strange	list	is	long.	Our	prisoner	has	done	all	this	despite	stiff	opposition	from	his
caste	members.	It	proves	he	has	no	principles	or	ethics.	It	is	also	a	lesson	to	us.
Our	 enemies	 will	 stoop	 to	 any	 level	 and	 form	 unlikely	 alliances	 to	 defeat	 the
cause	of	the	common	people.”
It	took	a	moment	for	Ekalavya	to	register	that	the	man	had	stopped	speaking.	He
was	 stunned	 by	 the	 convoluted	 logic	 of	 the	 argument.	 Yet	 there	 was	 no	 trace	 of
surprise	 around	 him.	 The	 old	 Brahmin	 still	 stood	 with	 his	 head	 held	 high,
contempt	written	across	his	craggy	face.	The	only	other	prosperous-looking	man
among	the	captives	began	sobbing,	his	plump	body	shaking	with	agitation.	Other
men	 and	 women	 began	 to	 wail,	 though	 Ekalavya	 was	 certain	 they	 had	 not
understood	 the	 longwinded	 speech.	 For	 that	 matter,	 he	 doubted	 whether	 many	 of
the	rebels	understood	what	the	war	was	about.
Takshaka	rose	from	his	seat	and	began	pacing.	People	looked	at	him	expectantly.
The	murmuring	soon	rose	to	a	crescendo	but	just	before	it	turned	unruly,	Takshaka
raised	his	hands	and	the	crowd	went	silent.	“This	man	is	an	enemy	of	our	people.
One	 by	 one,	 we	 will	 capture	 and	 eliminate	 all	 such	 enemies.	 Our	 war	 is	 the
people’s	 war,	 against	 discrimination	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religion,	 wealth,	 race,
language,	skin	colour	or	caste.	You	may	think	that	this	old	man	gave	education	to	a
few	 poor	 people;	 gave	 some	 money	 to	 set	 up	 clinics	 where	 they	 distributed
medicines;	and	started	schools	that	taught	a	few	to	make	petty	crafts;	and	so	he	is	a
good	man.	That	is	because	you	do	not	understand	the	true	nature	of	things.
“Such	enemies	undermine	our	cause.	The	education	he	provided	talks	about	varna
and	jati;	 he	 wants	 to	 instil	 such	 ideas	 into	 the	 minds	 of	 our	 people	 so	 they	 will
always	be	slaves	to	men	like	him.	He	started	hospitals	so	his	labourers	would	be
healthy	and	work	hard	to	make	money	for	him.	He	started	training	centres	to	have
free	workers	who	would	fill	his	coffers	by	selling	to	fat	merchants.	Who	bought
their	first	produce?	The	fat	merchant	who	is	standing	there	weeping.	Who	bought
goods	 from	 him?	 Balarama.	 Then	 he	 sold	 them	 to	 foreigners	 for	 more	 money.
Brahmins	 have	 prohibited	 sea	 travel.	 Yet	 these	 men	 have	 revived	 it.	 They	 are
willing	to	break	the	strictest	taboos	for	money.	Look	at	what	Balarama	is	doing.

He	 is	 building	 a	 golden	 city	 near	 the	 sea.	 He	 and	 his	 people	 will	 live	 in	 ivory
towers	while	people	like	us,	the	tillers	of	the	soil	and	the	sons	of	the	forest,	will
languish	 in	 poverty.	 When	 they	 eat	 sweet	 dishes	 from	 silver	 plates,	 we	 will	 be
eating	the	dry	roots	of	trees.	When	they	dress	in	silks,	our	women	will	have	only
tatters	to	cover	their	shame.	They	will	have	opulent	palaces	and	soft	beds	to	sleep
in	 and	 we	 will	 have	 stinking	 caves	 and	 hard	 rocks	 upon	 which	 to	 rest	 our	 tired
heads.”
Takshaka	 paused	 to	 enjoy	 the	 impact	 he	 was	 making	 on	 the	 people	 around	 him.
They	 were	 getting	 more	 and	 more	 agitated.	 He	 continued.	 “But	 who	 made	 them
rich?	Who	made	those	palaces	and	gardens,	the	chariots,	the	walkways	and	broad
roads,	the	exquisitely	carved	temples?	People	like	us.	Our	sweat	and	blood	made
the	luxuries	they	enjoy.	Remember,	every	activity	you	do	strengthens	the	hands	of
our	enemies.	They	will	use	every	coin	you	add	to	their	coffers	to	exploit	you.	My
fellow	Nagas,	Vanaras,	Yakshas,	Kinnaras,	Gandharvas	and	Asuras	–	the	war	has
just	begun!”
Ekalavya	 could	 sense	 the	 crowd	 growing	 angry	 as	 Takshaka	 spoke.	 Finally,	 he
paused	 dramatically	 and	 raised	 his	 voice	 to	 shout,	 “Should	 we	 allow	 these
bastards	to	keep	us	as	slaves?”
“Noooooo…”	the	crowd	answered	in	one	voice.
“Should	 our	 sisters	 go	 naked;	 our	 babies	 go	 hungry	 and	 our	 people	 become
homeless,	while	these	exploiters,	these	rich	swine,	wallow	in	luxury?”
“Noooo...”
“What	should	we	do	with	these	traitors?”	Takshaka’s	voice	dipped,	it	was	as	soft
as	silk.	But	the	next	moment	he	yelled,	“Comrades,	what	should	we	do	with	these
traitors	now?”
“Kill	 them!	 Kill	 them!”	 the	 crowd	 roared	 back.	 The	 chant	 of	 ‘Kill	 them!	 Kill
them!’	rose	to	a	crescendo.
Takshaka	turned	to	the	accused.	“The	People’s	Court	has	judged	and	spoken.	Their
will	shall	be	done.”
The	 wailing	 that	 rose	 from	 the	 hapless	 men	 and	 women	 could	 not	 dampen	 the

frenzy	of	the	crowd.	They	shoved	the	old	Brahmin	to	his	knees.	Kaliya	lifted	his
sword	while	the	man	mumbled	some	prayers.	In	one	clean	sweep,	Kaliya	severed
the	old	man’s	head	and	blood	spurted	from	the	headless	body.	The	severed	head
bounced	onto	the	ground	as	if	still	alive	and	came	to	rest	near	Ekalavya’s	feet.	He
recoiled	in	horror.	The	lifeless	eyes	of	the	old	man	stared	at	the	Nishada.	Those
eyes	would	haunt	him	for	a	long	time.	The	man’s	body	jerked	spasmodically	until
someone	stamped	on	it.
“Victory	to	the	people’s	revolution,”	cried	Kaliya.
A	thousand	voices	answered.	One	by	one,	the	jeering	crowd	pushed	each	captive
forward	and	Kaliya	and	his	band	of	soldiers	cut	them	down	mercilessly.	Finally,
the	fat	merchant	was	the	only	one	left.	Kaliya	pushed	him	forward	for	execution.
He	begged	for	mercy,	offering	everything	he	owned	to	Takshaka,	in	exchange	for
his	 life.	 Takshaka	 stopped	 the	 merchant’s	 execution	 at	 the	 last	 moment	 and	 the
crowd	 fell	 silent.	 “Comrades,	 he	 is	 offering	 the	 wealth	 he	 has	 cheated	 from	 our
poor.	Should	we	spare	him	and	take	his	wealth?”
“Nooo...”	yelled	the	crowd.	But	there	was	a	hint	of	doubt	in	their	voices.
A	lone	voice	cried	out,	“Yes!”	Every	head	turned	to	see	who	had	spoken.
“Yes?”	 Takshaka	 asked.	 “Yes?	 Who	 wants	 that	 tainted	 money?	 Who	 said	 yes?
Come	forward.	I	want	to	congratulate	the	man.”
The	 crowd	 went	 silent	 with	 fear.	 No	 one	 moved.	 Kaliya	 stood	 confused	 as
murmurs	bubbled	from	the	mob	like	a	cauldron.	Then	Takshaka	spoke.	“Our	war
needs	weapons,	men	and	supplies.	Who	will	provide	these?	The	ones	who	have
exploited	 our	 people	 for	 their	 trade,	 who	 else?	 These	 traders	 and	 businessmen
will	fund	our	war	against	their	own	people.	We	will	use	their	money	to	fight.	We
will	hold	this	rascal	captive	for	ransom.	We	will	use	and	bleed	him	and	then	the
People’s	 Court	 will	 execute	 its	 judgement,	 when	 he	 becomes	 a	 pauper	 like	 us.
Take	him	away.	The	Court	is	dismissed.”
Takshaka	jumped	down	from	the	platform.	Kaliya’s	men	dragged	away	the	kicking
and	screaming	merchant	and	locked	him	inside	a	hut.	In	passing,	Takshaka	patted
Ekalavya	 on	 the	 shoulder	 and	 smiled	 but	 Ekalavya	 could	 not	 smile	 back.	 The
violence	had	shocked	him.	His	romantic	hero	Takshaka	was	dead	and	a	devil	had

risen	in	his	place.
As	Ekalavya	was	about	to	follow	the	Naga	leader,	a	frail	voice	called	out	to	him.
He	 turned	 to	 find	 the	 old	 Naga	 King,	 Vasuki,	 standing	 a	 few	 feet	 away,	 holding
onto	 a	 staff	 to	 support	 his	 frail	 body.	 “Son,	 I	 hope	 you	 have	 learnt	 your	 lesson.
Escape!	 This	 place	 will	 make	 you	 into	 a	 demon.	 Escape	 now.	 Listen	 to	 an	 old
man’s	advice.”
A	boy,	who	was	barely	twelve,	kicked	the	staff	out	of	Vasuki’s	hands	and	the	old
man	stumbled	and	fell.	The	boy	ran	away	laughing.	Ekalavya	helped	the	frail	man
up	and	handed	the	staff	to	him	again.	“Escape,”	the	man	mumbled	again.
Someone	 cried	 out,	 “Hey	 Ekalavya!	 What	 are	 you	 doing	 with	 that	 mad	 man?
Come,	the	leader	is	asking	for	you.”
‘Mad	 man!	 He	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 only	 sane	 one	 in	 the	 whole	 village,’	 thought
Ekalavya.	He	hesitated	a	moment.	The	person	who	had	called	him	was	talking	to
someone	else	and	not	looking	at	him.	Ekalavya	looked	around,	took	a	deep	breath
and	ran.
“Hey	you...”	someone	yelled.	Ekalavya	could	hear	the	villagers	running	in	pursuit.
He	 ran	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction	 to	 Takshaka’s	 camp,	 crashing	 into	 the	 jungle,
rolling	on	the	ground,	getting	up,	stumbling	on	rocks,	and	getting	up	again.	He	ran
for	 dear	 life	 as	 arrows	 zinged	 perilously	 close	 and	 plunged	 into	 the	 tree	 trunks
with	sickening	thuds.	He	could	hear	the	barking	of	dogs	as	they	closed	in	on	him.
Ekalavya	ran	as	fast	as	he	could,	ignoring	the	blood	flowing	from	his	many	cuts
and	the	weakness	in	his	legs,	which	trembled	with	fear.	He	ran	over	a	ridge	and
suddenly	the	terrain	sloped	downwards.	Only	a	few	feet	separated	him	from	the
Ganga.	 The	 river	 rushed	 through	 a	 ravine,	 frothing	 and	 lashing	 at	 the	 rocks	 that
tried	 to	 restrain	 it.	 Ekalavya	 had	 only	 a	 few	 seconds	 to	 choose.	 Behind	 him	 lay
sure	 death	 with	 the	 Naga	 warriors	 closing	 in;	 while	 ahead	 lay	 some	 hope	 of
living.	The	river	looked	dangerous	in	the	pale	moonlight	with	massive	rocks	that
protruded	everywhere	like	panthers	waiting	to	pounce	upon	their	prey.	Ekalavya
tried	 to	 gather	 the	 courage	 to	 jump	 into	 the	 waters	 a	 hundred	 feet	 below.
Somewhere	above	the	hills,	thunder	clapped.
As	Ekalavya	ran	towards	the	edge	of	the	cliff,	two	fierce	warriors	leapt	from	an
overhanging	tree	and	blocked	his	path.	The	sharp	edges	of	their	swords	glistened

in	the	moonlight	as	they	advanced	cautiously.	Ekalavya	dodged	the	first	swipe	of
their	swords	but	lost	his	balance	and	fell	to	the	ground.	An	arrow	swished	past.	It
would	 have	 punctured	 his	 chest	 had	 he	 not	 fallen.	 Another	 arrow	 landed
uncomfortably	 close	 to	 his	 shoulder.	 One	 of	 the	 Naga	 warriors	 thrust	 his	 sword
towards	Ekalavya’s	throat.	The	sharp	tip	missed	by	an	inch	and	pierced	the	earth.
It	gave	the	Nishada	time	to	roll	a	few	feet,	grab	a	stone	and	throw	it	at	the	face	of
his	 assailant.	 As	 the	 Naga	 warrior	 fell	 with	 a	 grunt	 of	 pain,	 an	 arrow	 nicked
Ekalavya’s	left	shoulder	as	it	winged	past.	He	scrambled	up	and	ran	towards	the
cliff,	 arrows	 flying	 around	 him.	 The	 sky	 was	 getting	 ever	 darker	 with	 the
approaching	 thunderstorm.	 The	 roar	 of	 the	 river	 grew	 louder	 as	 flashes	 of
lightning	illuminated	the	jungle	like	day.	Ekalavya	could	see	more	and	more	dark
faces	approaching.
The	second	Naga	warrior	attacked	him	from	the	rear.	His	sword	found	its	mark	as
it	pierced	Ekalavya’s	thigh.	Ekalavya	went	down	with	a	cry.	As	he	rolled	over,	he
was	shocked	to	find	the	Naga	warrior	jumping	high	in	the	air.	He	descended	with
surprising	velocity,	his	sword	pointing	straight	at	Ekalavya’s	chest.	It	might	have
been	survival	instinct	or	pure	luck	but	Ekalavya	raised	his	injured	leg	and	kicked
the	 attacking	 Naga	 with	 all	 the	 strength	 born	 of	 desperation.	 The	 Naga	 had
expected	 Ekalavya	 to	 roll	 and	 dodge	 but	 not	 to	 make	 an	 offensive	 attack	 in	 his
injured	condition.	The	kick	caught	him	between	the	legs	and	propelled	him	over
the	cliff.	The	warrior	disappeared	into	the	abyss,	his	terrified	scream	fading	away.
More	 arrows	 where	 falling	 around	 him	 and	 Ekalavya	 could	 hear	 the	 shouts	 of
approaching	 Naga	 warriors	 above	 the	 roar	 of	 the	 river.	 He	 struggled	 up	 and
limped	to	cover	the	few	feet,	ignoring	the	pain	shooting	from	his	thigh.	He	tried	to
leap	 but	 could	 not.	 The	 first	 Naga,	 who	 had	 recovered	 from	 the	 stone-throw,
lunged	to	grab	Ekalavya.	For	a	precious	second,	the	Naga	and	the	Nishada	hung
over	the	cliff.	As	other	Naga	warriors	approached,	Ekalavya	knew	it	was	now	or
never.	Pressing	his	injured	leg	again	the	face	of	the	rock	and	screaming	in	pain	and
terror,	he	hurled	himself	into	the	embrace	of	the	Ganga.	The	Naga	followed,	as	he
had	 not	 let	 go.	 Together	 they	 fell	 into	 the	 roaring	 waters	 of	 the	 river.	 Scores	 of
angry	Naga	faces	arrived	a	few	seconds	later	to	peer	down	at	the	flaying	figures
of	 the	 fugitive	 and	 his	 captor,	 hurtling	 down	 the	 cliff.	 Providence	 saved
Ekalavya’s	life	as	he	fell	into	the	raging	waters.	His	companion	hit	a	protruding
rock	 that	 killed	 him	 instantly.	 The	 Ganga	 accepted	 the	 son	 of	 the	 forest	 into	 her
bosom.

***

It	 was	 raining	 heavily	 when	 the	 trembling	 soldiers	 informed	 Takshaka	 of
Ekalavya’s	 escape.	 The	 Naga	 leader	 received	 the	 news	 without	 emotion.	 A
surprised	 Kaliya	 asked	 Takshaka	 why	 he	 was	 not	 concerned.	 He	 had	 been	 so
insistent	about	tracking	and	bringing	the	boy	to	the	rebel	camp.	Takshaka	smiled
enigmatically	and	said,	“Ekalavya	is	still	young	and	trusts	the	world	too	much.	He
will	come	back	Kaliya,	with	greater	anger,	once	he	sees	what	kind	of	world	he	is
living	in.”
Kaliya	did	not	understand	but	shrugged	his	shoulders	in	resignation.	Strategy	was
Takshaka’s	area.	His	duty	was	just	to	implement	it.	But	he	hoped	the	young	man,
whom	he	had	come	to	like,	had	somehow	survived	the	roaring	river.

11	IN	THE	SHADOWS
SHAKUNI	STOOD	FRETTING	AT	THE	ENTRANCE	of	the	Queen’s	chamber.	He	hated	these

meetings	with	his	sister,	Gandhari;	though	she	was	like	his	mother	and	had	doted
upon	 him	 since	 infancy.	 He	 vividly	 remembered	 their	 journey	 from	 the	 stark
mountains	 of	 Gandhara	 to	 the	 sweltering	 plains	 of	 Hastinapura.	 For	 most	 of	 the
way,	 Bhishma,	 Grand	 Regent	 of	 the	 Kurus,	 had	 carried	 him	 across	 his	 saddle
while	 his	 exquisitely	 beautiful	 sister	 rode	 silently	 behind.	 Bhishma	 had	 tried	 to
make	 him	 laugh	 by	 telling	 him	 stories	 about	 short-tempered	 ascetics	 and	 funny
celestial	 creatures.	 He	 had	 obliged	 the	 old	 man	 with	 a	 few	 unaffected	 laughs.
Even	at	 the	age	 of	 five,	 deceit	came	naturally	to	him	and	not	many	saw	past	his
smile.
Bhishma	had	doted	upon	him,	repentant	about	what	he	had	done	to	Gandhara	and
its	people.	Shakuni	had	won	the	affection	of	the	gruff	old	patriarch	with	his	sweet
ways	 and	 skill	 at	 arms.	 The	 old	 man	 had	 trained	 the	 young	 Gandhara	 Prince
himself.	 Shakuni	 was	 intelligent,	 skilled,	 and	 a	 quick	 learner.	 He	 had	 won	 the
affections	of	many	of	the	palace	staff	with	his	affable	manners	and	propensity	for
small	gifts.	He	could	handle	anyone,	except	his	sister.	It	did	not	matter	that	she	had
chosen	 to	 be	 blind	 like	 her	 husband.	 She	 still	 saw	 through	 him,	 the	 silken	 band
covering	her	eyes	notwithstanding.	She	could	strip	his	soul	naked	with	just	a	tilt	of
her	head.
A	servant	came	out	of	the	Queen’s	chamber,	bowed	to	Shakuni,	and	informed	him
he	could	enter.	As	he	stepped	in,	the	fragrance	of	sandalwood	seemed	to	suffocate
him.	 The	 opulence	 of	 the	 room	 brought	 back	 all	 the	 ugly	 memories	 of	 his
childhood.	He	cleared	his	throat	to	announce	his	presence	and	wondered	for	the
umpteenth	time	why	his	sister	had	chosen	voluntary	blindness.	Was	it	for	spite	or
love?	It	had	been	a	forced	marriage,	thrust	upon	a	hapless	Princess	by	a	powerful
man.	‘Bhishma!	One	day,	I	will	get	back	at	you,’	thought	Shakuni.	Far	away	to	the
West,	the	plains	stretched	as	far	as	the	eyes	could	see	and	then	vanished	into	the
misty	 outline	 of	 the	 distant	 hills.	 ‘Beyond	 that	 lies	 my	 land,’	 mused	 Shakuni,
saying	a	silent	prayer.

“Sit,	Shakuni.”
Shakuni	 seated	 himself,	 unable	 to	 think	 of	 the	 right	 words.	 He	 wondered	 at	 the
commanding	presence	his	sister	had	and	let	out	a	sigh.	She	was	the	most	powerful
woman	in	the	entire	sub-continent	and	the	real	power	behind	the	blind	King.	Even
the	Grand	Regent	rarely	overturned	her	decisions.	She	was	the	only	person	who
could	talk	back	to	the	powerful	old	man	without	sounding	rude.	She	was	assertive
in	 a	 quiet	 sort	 of	 way.	 She	 doted	 on	 her	 eldest	 son,	 Suyodhana.	 It	 was	 an	 open
secret	that	she	fought	her	own	battles	with	her	sister-in-law,	Kunti,	who	had	been
plotting	 behind	 Gandhari’s	 back	 to	 get	 her	 own	 son,	 Yudhishtra,	 installed	 as
Crown	Prince.
“I	will	come	straight	to	the	point,	brother,”	Gandhari	said	quietly,	as	Shakuni	grew
more	 nervous.	 Whenever	 she	 addressed	 him	 as	 ‘brother’,	 he	 knew	 it	 meant
trouble.	“Stay	away	from	my	sons,	Shakuni.”	Gandhari’s	blindfolded	eyes	turned
towards	her	brother.
Shakuni	stood	up	and	walked	towards	a	window.	He	did	not	wish	to	sit	facing	her
bound	 eyes.	 He	 caressed	 the	 dice	 he	 always	 carried.	 They	 rubbed	 against	 each
other	and	Gandhari	flinched,	hearing	the	unmistakable	sound	of	bone	hitting	bone.
“I	 am	 just	 being	 a	 good	 uncle	 to	 them,	 sister,”	 Shakuni	 said,	 still	 eyeing	 the
western	horizon.	The	sky	was	a	pandemonium	of	colours	as	the	sun	set	in	a	haze	of
dust.	How	cool	and	pleasant	it	would	be	in	Gandhara,	Shakuni	thought	wistfully.
He	wanted	to	get	the	meeting	over	with.	It	was	getting	late	for	his	prayers.
“Why	 don’t	 you	 go	 back	 and	 take	 the	 Governor’s	 post	 at	 Gandhara?	 The	 Grand
Regent	 has	 reiterated	 the	 offer.	 You	 will	 be	 the	 de-facto	 King	 and	 have	 total
autonomy.	Why	are	you	still	hanging	around	here?”
Shakuni	was	silent	for	a	long	time.	Then	he	turned	and	threw	the	dice	forcefully
onto	 a	 nearby	 table.	 They	 rolled	 and	 stopped	 with	 the	 six	 points	 upwards.	 A
perfect	twelve!	Shakuni	grunted	with	the	satisfaction	of	a	master.
“Throw	 away	 the	 dice.	 They	 will	 bring	 ruin!”	 Gandhari	 snapped,	 inclining	 her
head	towards	the	sound.
“You	want	me	to	throw	away	the	dice?	Have	you	forgotten,	Gandhari?	You	know

these	are	no	ordinary	dice.	They	were	made	from	the	thighbone	of	our	slain	father.
Fortunately,	 our	 people	 bury	 the	 dead	 and	 do	 not	 burn	 them	 like	 logs,	 as	 do	 the
uncivilized	people	of	your	adopted	country.	Our	father’s	soul	lives	in	these	dice.
They	 obey	 my	 command.	 See,	 I	 call	 ‘Four!’	 and	 they	 fall	 in	 perfect	 fours.	 I	 call
‘Eight’	 and	 there	 it	 is.	 Observe	 their	 magic.	 And	 you	 want	 me	 to	 throw	 them
away?	Are	you	afraid?	Have	you	forgotten	everything?	Why,	you	used	to	tell	me
when	I	was	young	that	this	blasted	country	should	be	destroyed	as	they	destroyed
our	beloved	Gandhara.”
“Shakuni,	it	was	a	long	time	ago.	I	was	young	and	full	of	spite	towards	the	people
of	Hastinapura.	Now	this	is	my	country,	my	land	and	my	people.	My	husband	rules
here	and	tomorrow	my	son,	Suyodhana,	will	be	King.	Please	go	back	and	rule	our
ancestral	land.	Do	not	spoil	my	sons	here.”
“Spoil?	 Why	 would	 I	 spoil	 my	 own	 nephews?	 Do	 you	 not	 know	 that	 Kunti	 is
planning	 to	 install	 Yudhishtra	 as	 Crown	 Prince?	 Where	 will	 your	 sons	 go	 then?
Where	will	you	and	your	blind	husband	go?”
“Kunti,	ha!	What	can	a	poor	widow	do	to	me?	Everyone	knows	her	sons	are	not
the	 real	 sons	 of	 Pandu.	 They	 do	 not	 have	 any	 claim	 to	 the	 throne.	 Pandu	 was
impotent.	She	had	those	sons	by	other	men.	What	claim	do	such	bastard	sons	have
on	 the	 throne	of	Hastinapura?	Do	not	 try	your	 manipulations	 with	 me,	 brother.	 I
will	not	fall	for	your	low	tricks.”
Shakuni	picked	up	the	dice	from	the	table	and	caressed	them.	“How	innocent	you
are,	sister.	Why	is	Kunti	so	respectful	to	the	Brahmins	and	Priests?	Why	does	she
lead	their	delegations	to	Bhishma	and	Vidhura?	She	is	playing	a	dangerous	game.
She	will	pull	the	rug	from	beneath	your	feet	before	you	know	it.	Why	was	Kripa
fired	 from	 his	 job	 and	 the	 orthodox	 Drona	 assigned	 the	 position	 of	 Raj	 Guru?
Have	 you	 seen	 how	 Drona	 fawns	 over	 the	 Pandavas?	 Do	 you	 not	 see
Parashurama’s	hand	pulling	the	strings	and	controlling	events?	What	is	Dhaumya
doing	here?	Why	are	they	so	close	to	the	cunning	Yadava	Prince,	Krishna?	How
naïve	you	are,	my	dear.”
Gandhari	remained	silent.	The	hint	of	a	smile	played	on	her	lips.	When	Shakuni
finished	speaking,	she	slowly	stood	up	and	moved	close	to	him.	“Look	at	me,”	she
said.	Shakuni	reluctantly	turned	around	to	face	her.	He	averted	his	gaze	from	her
bound	eyes	and	looked	down.	“I	can	deal	with	Kunti	myself	but	do	not	complicate

matters.	 Are	 you	 hatching	 one	 of	 your	 devious	 plots	 again?	 My	 son	 will	 be	 the
ruler	of	India	in	his	own	right.	I	do	not	want	any	blemish	on	his	reputation.	Keep
your	schemes,	intrigues	and	those	blasted	dice,	which	you	claim	to	be	made	from
our	 father’s	 thigh,	 away	 from	 my	 sons.	 I	 do	 not	 care	 about	 the	 past.	 I	 am	 more
concerned	 with	 my	 sons	 and	 my	 husband.	 This	 country	 has	 accepted	 me	 as	 its
daughter-in-law.	Go	back	to	Gandhara	today.	Am	I	making	myself	clear,	brother,
or	do	you	want	me	to	repeat	it?”
Shakuni	did	not	say	anything.	He	turned	his	back	on	his	sister	and	faced	the	setting
sun.	Gandhari	raised	her	voice	and	asked	him	again,	“Will	you	assure	me	that	you
will	leave	for	Gandhara	today,	Shakuni?”
“I	will	discuss	it	with	Bhishma	and	let	you	know.”
Gandhari	snorted.	“Bhishma…	huh…	I	know	what	he	will	say.	He	dotes	on	you
and	lives	in	the	delusion	that	he	wronged	you	in	your	childhood.	He	will	say	you
can	stay	on	in	Hastinapura	for	as	long	as	you	wish.”
“Then	I	will	not	have	a	choice,	sister.	If	the	Grand	Regent	himself	wishes	it	so...”
Shakuni	walked	towards	the	door,	a	smile	quirking	the	corners	of	his	thin	mouth.
“I	warn	you	again,	Shakuni.	Stay	away	from	my	children,	or	else	you	will	pay	for
it!”	Gandhari	cried	out	to	his	retreating	form.
‘Why	just	me,	sister?	I	will	make	the	whole	of	India	pay	for	the	wrongs	done	to
Gandhara,’	Shakuni	muttered	softly	to	himself	as	he	walked	out.	In	the	corridor,	he
came	face	to	 face	with	the	Prime	Minister.	“Aha,	so	Shudras	may	now	enter	the
Queen’s	chamber?	This	country	is	progressing	quickly,”	Shakuni	mocked.
Vidhura	 simply	 stared	 at	 the	 Gandharan	 Prince	 and	 Shakuni	 finally	 averted	 his
eyes.	Vidhura	did	not	wish	to	dignify	Shakuni’s	remark	with	an	answer.	Shakuni
walked	away	without	looking	back.	Vidhura	gazed	after	him	for	a	few	moments;
his	 forehead	 furrowed	 with	 worry,	 and	 then	 decided	 to	 follow.	 The	 corridors
were	lit	with	torches	that	spewed	black	smoke,	making	the	air	hazy.	Vidhura	could
see	Shakuni	walking	at	a	brisk	pace,	his	tall	and	wiry	figure	entering	the	circles	of
light	 and	 darkness	 in	 quick	 succession.	 He	 wore	 leather	 footwear	 that	 made	 no
sound.	Vidhura	cursed	his	own	choice	of	footwear,	made	of	the	traditional	wood,
which	 made	 a	 tremendous	 clatter	 as	 he	 walked	 along.	 He	 bent	 and	 quietly

removed	his	slippers	and	then	hurried	down	the	corridor	on	his	bare	feet	to	catch
up	with	Shakuni.
Shakuni	 gently	 tapped	 on	 Suyodhana’s	 door	 and	 entered	 without	 waiting	 for
permission.	 Vidhura	 moved	 to	 the	 door	 to	 listen.	 He	 prayed	 that	 no	 servant	 or
guard	would	 come	 along.	 It	would	 have	 been	 awkward	 to	 explain	 why	 he	 was
eavesdropping,	 not	 that	 anyone	 would	 ask	 for	 an	 explanation	 from	 the	 Prime
Minister.	Nevertheless,	it	would	give	another	morsel	to	the	gossipmongers	to	say
what	else	could	one	expect	from	Vidhura.
***

Suyodhana	 rose	 as	 he	 saw	 his	 uncle	 enter	 his	 chamber.	 Sushasana	 and	 Sushala
were	 sitting	 on	 the	 bed	 and	 they	 too	 stood	 up	 in	 respect.	 Shakuni	 pinched
Sushala’s	rosy	cheeks	and	commented	that	she	was	growing	into	a	beauty	like	her
mother.	The	young	girl	blushed	and	ran	out	of	the	room.	She	was	startled	to	see
Vidhura	standing	outside,	but	went	away	without	uttering	a	word.	Vidhura	cursed
his	luck	again.
“Hmm,	 I	 feel	 a	 sense	 of	 despondency	 in	 this	 room.	 What	 has	 happened	 to	 my
nephews?”	 Shakuni	 asked	 quietly,	 sitting	 down	 in	 the	 cushioned	 chair	 near	 the
bed.
“We	 are	 fed	 up	 with	 Bhima.	 One	 day	 I	 am	 going	 to	 murder	 him,”	 spat	 out
Suyodhana.
“What	has	happened?	That	fatso	has	a	sharp	tongue,	a	thick	head	and	strong	arms	–
a	dangerous	combination,”	Shakuni	said,	amused.
“Guru	 Drona	 insulted	 Suyodhana	 again	 today,	 calling	 him	 an	 idiot.	 We	 hate	 his
classes.	The	Guru	uses	his	tongue	only	to	praise	Arjuna	or	Bhima	on	their	valour,
Yudhishtra	on	his	knowledge,	and	Nakula	and	Sahadeva	for	their	intelligence.	The
rest	of	us	are	nitwits.	We	are	fed	up,”	Sushasana	complained.
“Is	 it	 just	 because	 Drona	 called	 you	 idiots	 that	 you	 are	 sulking	 like	 women?”
Shakuni	mocked,	knowing	Suyodhana	would	flare	up.
“Uncle,	 there	 are	 enough	 people	 around	 to	 call	 us	 names	 and	 mock	 at	 our	 blind
parents	without	you	joining	them.”

“I	think	you	got	licked	by	Bhima	again,	nephew.”	Shakuni	twisted	the	knife	another
turn.
Suyodhana	 gritted	 his	 teeth.	 He	 kicked	 over	 a	 vase	 of	 flowers	 in	 frustration.	 It
shattered	into	pieces	on	the	marble	floor.	Shakuni	laughed	aloud.	“Did	he	call	you
the	 ‘son	 of	 the	 blind	 King’?	 Did	 he	 mock	 my	 sister	 and	 brother-in-law’s
helplessness?”
Suyodhana	did	not	reply.	Sushasana	answered	instead.	“They	do	so	all	the	time.
Even	 Guru	 Drona.	 Whenever	 we	 forget	 some	 scriptures	 or	 make	 a	 mistake,	 he
asks	his	favourite	Pandavas	to	demonstrate	their	superior	intellect.	Then	he	says
‘what	more	can	be	expected	from	the	children	of	the	blind?’	It	is	cruel.	He	keeps
saying	that	the	only	hope	for	our	country	lies	in	Yudhishtra	becoming	King.”
“Nephews,	has	anyone	told	you	that	those	who	mock	you	so	much	are	not	your	real
cousins?”
Suyodhana	 turned	 to	 face	 his	 uncle,	 his	 eyes	 wide	 with	 surprise.	 “What	 do	 you
mean,	not	our	real	cousins?”	Sushasana	too,	came	to	stand	close	to	Shakuni.
“They	are	bastards!”	Shakuni	burst	into	laughter.	“Don’t	stare	at	me	like	fools.	It
is	common	knowledge	that	your	Uncle	Pandu	was	impotent.	Your	aunt	took	lovers
to	beget	sons,	at	your	uncle’s	insistence.	Do	you	remember	your	Aunt	Madri,	who
committed	sati	on	 Pandu’s	 pyre?	 Well,	 Pandu	 forced	 even	 her	 to	 beget	 children
with	 other	 men,	 and	 Nakula	 and	 Sahadeva	 are	 those	 children.	 Yudhishtra	 is	 the
child	of	some	Brahmin;	Arjuna	of	some	petty	Prince	of	the	Indra	clan;	and	Bhima
is	the	son	of	a	forest	dweller.	In	other	words,	all	your	cousins	are	bastards.”
Shakuni	 paused	 to	 see	 the	 impact	 he	 was	 making	 on	 the	 two	 boys.	 They	 looked
shocked,	as	if	hit	by	lightning	but	slowly	a	smile	spread	across	Sushasana’s	face.
Suyodhana	shook	his	head,	as	if	trying	to	deny	what	he	had	heard.	“Suyodhana,	it
is	even	worse	than	you	think.	There	are	unconfirmed	rumours	that	your	aunt	Kunti
had	an	affair	with	a	Prince	of	the	Suryavansha	clan	in	her	teens.	She	gave	birth	to
a	son	but	abandoned	the	child,	fearing	scandal.	Some	say	she	killed	the	child	after
he	was	born.	Others	think	he	is	growing	up	somewhere	with	foster	parents.	In	fact,
I	am	searching	for	the	boy	–	he	would	be	a	couple	of	years	older	than	you,	if	he
survived.”

“Uncle,	 Suyodhana	 is	 not	 hearing	 you,”	 Sushasana	 cried.	 Grabbing	 his	 brother’s
shoulders,	 he	 screamed	 with	 joy.	 “Suyodhana,	 don’t	 you	 see	 what	 this	 means?
Yudhishtra	 has	 no	 claim	 on	 the	 throne	 of	 Hastinapura.	 He	 is	 just	 a	 bastard	 son,
born	out	of	wedlock;	the	son	of	a	wayward	woman.”
Shakuni	laughed,	slapping	his	thighs.	Suyodhana	watched	them	both	in	silence.
Outside	 the	 room,	 Vidhura	 shook	 his	 head	 in	 despair.	 He	 was	 aware	 of	 the
rumours	about	Kunti,	but	he	had	never	judged	people	by	his	own	moral	standards.
For	him,	morality	was	a	personal	thing	and	what	Kunti	and	her	husband	had	done
was	irrelevant.	The	thought	had	never	entered	Vidhura’s	mind	that	Yudhishtra	had
a	claim	to	the	throne	of	Hastinapura.	He	was	the	son	of	the	younger	Prince,	Pandu.
Suyodhana	was	the	eldest	son	of	the	reigning	ruler,	Dhritarashtra.	It	was	accepted
that	Suyodhana	would	succeed	his	father.	When	Shakuni	said	that	Yudhishtra	could
not	claim	the	throne	because	he	was	a	bastard,	it	had	hit	Vidhura	like	a	bolt.	Why
had	 he	 been	 oblivious	 to	 the	 palace	 intrigue	 thickening	 around	 him?	 This	 meant
more	trouble.	He	had	not	paid	attention	to	people	like	Drona	and	the	Priests	and
the	 nobles	 close	 to	 Kunti,	 who	 aired	 their	 wishes	 openly	 regarding	 Yudhishtra
succeeding	 Dhritarashtra.	 Now	 all	 the	 unrelated	 conversations	 and	 innocuous
comments	made	by	certain	nobles;	the	elaborate	courtesy	shown	by	Yudhishtra	to
all	the	 Priests;	 and	 other	 minor	 things,	 which	 he	 had	 attached	 no	 importance	 to
earlier,	 fell	 into	 a	 pattern.	 Someone	 powerful	 and	 intelligent	 was	 moving	 his
pieces	with	skill.	Was	Parashurama	controlling	the	strings	of	this	dangerous	game?
Immersed	 in	 his	 thoughts,	 Vidhura	 almost	 missed	 Aswathama	 entering
Suyodhana’s	chamber.	He	hoped	the	son	of	Drona	had	not	seen	him.
Aswathama	 was	 met	 with	 loud	 exclamations	 of	 jubilation	 and	 surprise	 by	 his
friends.	But	Shakuni	frowned	when	he	saw	Drona’s	son.	He	had	not	accounted	for
Aswathama	being	present	and	cursed	under	his	breath.	Time	was	running	out.	He
did	 not	 have	 a	 choice,	 so	 he	 pressed	 on.	 Keeping	 a	 wary	 eye	 on	 Aswathama,
Shakuni	 said,	 “Suyodhana,	 next	 time	 Bhima	 calls	 you	 the	 son	 of	 the	 blind	 King,
you	know	how	to	answer	back.”
Suyodhana	remained	silent	but	Sushasana	chuckled.	“Uncle,	my	brother	is	afraid
of	Bhima’s	brute	strength.	Every	time	either	of	us	has	fought	him,	he	has	trounced
us.”
Suyodhana’s	 eyes	 flashed	 in	 anger	 but	 Shakuni	 smiled.	 Aswathama	 remained

impassive	but	his	eyes	bored	into	Shakuni.	“Son,	I	know	you	are	not	strong	enough
to	 challenge	 Bhima.	 But	 there	 are	 other	 methods	 of	 getting	 rid	 of	 him.”	 He
lowered	his	voice	to	a	whisper.	”A	few	years	ago,	I	told	you	how	we	got	rid	of
our	enemies	in	Gandhara.	When	your	opponent	is	strong,	it	is	not	valour	that	will
win	the	battle,	but	intelligence.”	Suyodhana	looked	startled.
Listening	 to	 the	 conspiracy	 being	 hatched	 by	 the	 Gandhara	 Prince,	 Vidhura	 was
tempted	 to	 enter	 the	 room	 and	 break	 up	 the	 party.	 But	 he	 needed	 to	 know	 how
Suyodhana	would	react.	Suyodhana	paced	the	room,	his	head	down,	clenching	and
unclenching	his	fists.
Finally,	 Suyodhana	 raised	 his	 head	 and	 met	 his	 friend’s	 eyes.	 Aswathama	 shook
his	 head	 imperceptibly	 and	 Suyodhana	 acknowledged	 it	 with	 a	 nod.	 “Uncle
Shakuni,	I	cannot	agree	to	such	tactics.	I	am	a	Kshatriya,	a	warrior.	I	may	not	be	an
expert	 with	 my	 sword	 or	 bow,	 but	 that	 is	 my	 fault	 and	 I	 am	 striving	 hard	 to
improve	my	skills.	My	Guru’s	open	dislike	has	not	made	my	learning	easy.	I	feel
my	confidence	draining	away	the	moment	I	see	Bhima.	I	hate	the	way	he	and	his
brothers	 treat	 us	 and	 others	 weaker	 than	 themselves.	 But	 I	 cannot	 agree	 to	 any
unfair	means	to	defeat	them.	One	day,	with	hard	work	and	practice,	I	will	become
a	 better	 warrior	 than	 Bhima.	 Until	 then,	 Lord	 Shankara	 has	 willed	 that	 I	 must
endure	Bhima’s	tyranny.	I	consider	it	a	prod	from	the	Lord	to	strive	harder.	Please
do	not	tell	me	to	poison	my	cousin,	however	evil	he	may	be.”
Vidhura	breathed	a	sigh	of	relief.	He	heard	Shakuni	arguing	with	Suyodhana	and
decided	 that	 the	 time	 for	 intervention	 had	 arrived.	 He	 entered	 and	 stood	 in	 the
doorway,	 his	 hands	 crossed	 over	 his	 chest.	 Suyodhana	 and	 Sushasana	 looked
startled	to	see	Vidhura	in	their	room.	If	Shakuni	and	Aswathama	were	shocked	as
well,	their	faces	did	not	betray	it.	A	small	smile	played	at	the	corners	of	Shakuni’s
mouth,	while	Aswathama	simply	acknowledged	Vidhura’s	presence	with	a	formal
folding	of	his	hands	and	a	bow.	Vidhura	accepted	the	greeting	with	a	nod	of	his
head	and	moved	towards	the	Crown	Prince.	“May	I	know	what	this	party	is	for?”
But	 it	 was	 Shakuni	 who	 answered.	 “When	 we	 decide	 to	 have	 low-castes	 at	 our
parties,	we	shall	send	you	an	invitation.”
“We	can	discuss	that	with	the	Grand	Regent	at	the	Court	tomorrow.	Perhaps	Lord
Bhishma	 can	 throw	 some	 light	 on	 the	 propriety	 of	 a	 Shudra	 joining	 a	 party	 of
nobles	plotting	murder,”	Vidhura	answered	without	looking	at	Shakuni.	His	eyes

bored	into	Suyodhana,	who	stared	at	his	own	feet.
“Get	 out	 of	 this	 place	 to	 where	 you	 belong.	 This	 is	 the	 chamber	 of	 the	 Crown
Prince	of	Hastinapura.	Do	not	pollute	this	place,”	Shakuni	said,	moving	closer	to
Vidhura.
Vidhura	calmly	turned	towards	Shakuni	and	said,	“I	think	that	is	my	line	to	you,
Mlecha	–	get	out	of	my	country	to	where	you	belong.	This	is	the	chamber	of	the
Crown	Prince	of	Hastinapura.	Do	not	pollute	this	holy	land	with	your	presence.”
Shakuni	looked	at	Suyodhana	and	Sushasana,	but	they	would	not	meet	his	eyes,	so
he	smiled	at	Vidhura	and	said,	“Sir,	it	was	just	a	joke.	Why	take	it	so	seriously?
Pardon	us.	We	did	not	mean	anything	by	it.”
Aswathama	 laughed	 aloud	 and	 then	 stopped	 as	 Vidhura	 glared	 at	 him.	 Shakuni
walked	 away	 without	 another	 word.	 A	 deafening	 silence	 ensued.	 None	 of	 those
who	 remained	 in	 the	 room	 observed	 Shakuni	 carrying	 away	 a	 white	 silk	 shawl
belonging	to	Suyodhana.	The	young	Prince	was	fond	of	soft	silk	and	was	known	to
wear	 beautiful,	 white	 shawls.	 Vidhura	 felt	 pity	 stir	 in	 his	 heart	 for	 the	 Crown
Prince.	He	wanted	to	put	a	comforting	arm	around	Suyodhana’s	broad	shoulders,
but	decided	against	it.	He	 remembered	 Shakuni’s	 taunt	 about	 his	 low	 status	 and
something	pulled	him	back	from	touching	the	Prince.	He	was	also	a	little	peeved
that	 none	 of	 these	 high-born	 boys	 had	 bothered	 to	 defend	 him	 against	 Shakuni’s
bigotry.	“You	should	be	ashamed…”	he	began.
Aswathama	 interrupted	 him.	 “Sir,	 there	 is	 nothing	 for	 us	 to	 be	 ashamed	 of.
Suyodhana	answered	Shakuni	with	nobility.	He	has	been	true	to	his	heart	and	said
that	he	will	not	stoop	to	treachery,	even	though	the	Pandavas	have	been	harassing
the	 entire	 Kaurava	 clan	 since	 anyone	 can	 remember.	 If	 someone	 has	 to	 be
ashamed,	it	should	be	the	Pandava	brothers	and	the	coterie	of	Priests	and	god	men
who	 are	 determined	 to	 ruin	 this	 country	 for	 their	 petty	 gains.	 Everybody	 in	 the
street	knows	 that	the	Pandavas	should	have	 no	place	in	this	palace.	They	are	as
alien	to	this	place	as	you	or	I.	You	owe	your	position	to	your	abilities	and	I	to	the
Prince’s	 friendship.	 But	 the	 Pandavas	 owe	 their	 places	 only	 to	 the	 contrived
manipulations	of	a	few	Priests	and	a	cunning	mother.”
Vidhura	did	not	reply.	Nobody	spoke.	A	night	bird	kept	calling	at	regular	intervals
from	the	garden.	Its	forlorn	cry	helped	only	to	thicken	the	uneasy	silence.	Finally,

Vidhura	 said,	 “Suyodhana,	 we	 will	 meet	 Lord	 Bhishma	 tomorrow.	 It	 is	 not	 to
accuse	you	of	anything	but	I	think	some	advice	from	the	Grand	Regent	will	help.	I
would	like	all	three	of	you	to	be	present	at	Lord	Bhishma’s	receiving	chamber	in
the	morning.”
Aswathama	 tried	 to	 protest	 but	 Suyodhana	 stopped	 him	 with	 a	 gesture.	 “Uncle
Vidhura,	I	will	be	there	and	so	will	these	two.	It	is	always	a	pleasure	to	listen	to
Lord	Bhishma.”	Suyodhana	bowed	to	his	uncle.
A	rush	of	affection	for	the	Prince	overwhelmed	the	Prime	Minister	of	the	Kurus
and	 his	 hand	 touched	 Suyodhana’s	 bowed	 head	 in	 benediction.	 Vidhura	 caught
Aswathama’s	look	of	surprise	and	blushed.	Hiding	his	embarrassment,	he	said	in	a
gruff	voice,	“Young	men,	the	night	is	passing	and	sleep	will	do	us	all	good.	Good
night.”
Vidhura	left	Suyodhana’s	chamber	and	stood	alone	in	the	corridor	for	a	long	time.
He	 was	 afraid	 for	 the	 Prince.	 He	 was	 afraid	 that	 the	 nobility	 of	 character	 he
displayed	now	would	wither	away	in	time.	The	pressure	on	Suyodhana	was	going
to	be	tremendous.	Inch	by	inch,	the	conservatives	were	gaining	space	and	it	was
going	to	be	a	long-drawn	war.	The	enigmatic	enemy,	Parashurama,	was	a	master
strategist	and	his	invisible	grip	on	society	was	tightening.
The	 night	 bird	 that	 had	 been	 calling	 in	 the	 palace	 garden	 sounded	 close	 to	 the
palace	now.	Its	mate	answered	from	somewhere	nearby.	It	might	have	been	a	cry
of	 passion	 but	 the	 sound	 stoked	 the	 sleeping	 fears	 in	 Vidhura’s	 mind.	 He	 had	 a
premonition	that	evil	awaited	in	the	dark,	ready	to	pounce	on	him.	The	bird’s	cry
was	an	omen.	He	shivered	and	looked	around	to	see	if	anything	was	amiss.	The
night	was	dark	and	cloudy.	The	lamps	that	created	islands	of	gentle	light	in	the	sea
of	 shadows	 had	 begun	 to	 splutter	 and	 die.	 Vidhura	 was	 a	 worried	 man.	 His
concerns	 were	 weaving	 a	 tangle	 in	 his	 mind.	 He	 could	 not	 see	 anything	 out	 of
place	nor	could	his	ears	pick	up	any	unusual	sounds.	‘Perhaps	I	am	getting	old,	or
as	 Bhishma	 is	 fond	 of	 saying,	 the	 pressure	 of	 work	 is	 getting	 on	 my	 nerves,’
Vidhura	 thought,	 sighing	 in	 weariness.	 ‘Today	 also,	 work	 is	 going	 to	 keep	 me
away	from	home.	When	will	I	get	some	time	to	spend	with	my	family?	My	sons
will	 be	 waiting	 for	 me,	 yet	 this	 is	 my	 fate,	 to	 toil	 hard	 and	 feel	 guilty	 for	 not
spending	 enough	 time	 with	 them.’	 He	 sighed	 to	 himself,	 trying	 to	 push	 away	 the
image	 of	 his	 wife	 and	 two	 little	 sons.	 Immersed	 in	 thought,	 he	 turned	 left	 and
walked	along	the	long,	pillared	corridor	that	ran	around	the	palace.	Had	he	turned

right	 instead	 of	 left	 that	 night,	 the	 history	 of	 India	 would	 perhaps	 have	 been
different.
***

It	 took	 another	 hour	 for	 Aswathama	 to	 leave	 for	 his	 home,	 located	 more	 than
fifteen	minutes’	walk	from	the	main	palace.	Sushasana	too,	lingered	before	retiring
to	his	own	chamber.	A	few	moments	later,	the	shadow	of	a	thick	stone	pillar	split
and	a	fat	man	stepped	into	the	dim	pool	of	light	thrown	by	a	flickering	torch.	He
had	 a	 surprisingly	 thin	 face	 for	 such	 a	 bulky	 body	 and	 was	 almost	 bald.	 The
pockmarked	 face	 had	 trapped	 a	 frown	 five	 decades	 before	 and	 had	 held	 onto	 it
firmly	ever	since.	His	shoes	of	soft	leather	did	not	make	any	sound	as	he	walked
in	 the	 opposite	 direction	 to	 Vidhura.	 He	 was	 careful	 not	 to	 step	 into	 the	 small
islands	of	light	thrown	by	the	torches	at	intervals	along	the	corridor	or	make	any
noise	to	awaken	the	dozing	guards.	He	belonged	to	the	world	of	shadows.
He	paused	near	one	of	the	smaller	rooms	in	the	west	wing	of	the	palace.	He	did
not	 have	 to	 wait	 for	 long.	 The	 door	 quietly	 opened	 and	 the	 Prince	 of	 Gandhara
peered	out.	With	a	curt	nod,	Shakuni	invited	the	fat	man	in.	There	was	an	oil	lamp
and	 a	 few	 palm	 leaf	 manuscripts	 strewn	 on	 a	 small	 table	 in	 the	 corner.	 Shakuni
took	a	leaf	from	the	pile	and	handed	it	over	to	the	man.	“Purochana...”	Shakuni’s
voice	 was	 muffled	 but	 he	 stopped	 short	 when	 he	 saw	 the	 expression	 on	 the	 fat
man’s	face.	He	realised	his	mistake.	Names	were	prohibited	in	this	deadly	game
of	espionage	and	intrigue.	‘What	the	hell,’	he	thought,	‘Purochana	is	only	a	paid
servant	and	I	am	the	master.’	But	as	Shakuni	gazed	into	Purochana’s	cold	eyes,	he
felt	a	chill.	‘I	have	to	be	more	careful	in	future,’	he	thought.
“That	Brahmin	boy	and	Sushasana,	showed	no	signs	of	retiring	for	the	night	and
were	hanging	around	in	the	Prince’s	chamber,”	Purochana	said	as	he	took	the	palm
script	 from	 Shakuni’s	 hand.	 Though	 a	 scowl	 was	 a	 permanent	 feature	 of	 the	 fat
man’s	face,	when	he	finished	reading	the	message,	the	trace	of	a	smile	appeared
on	his	lips.	The	message	was	for	Takshaka	and	simply	said:	The	package	will	be
delivered	tonight.
“Tell	 him	 to	 strictly	 follow	 my	 instructions	 and	 not	 get	 greedy	 and	 hatch	 some
stupid	plans.”
“He	will	not	take	orders	from	you,	foreigner,”	Purochana	said,	distaste	making	his

voice	hard.
“The	hell	he	will	not!	If	he	takes	my	money,	he	will	do	what	I	say.”
“Let	us	hope	so.”	Purochana	gave	a	curt	bow	and	disappeared	into	his	world	of
shadows.	He	would	have	to	go	past	the	guards	at	the	gates	and	it	was	already	late.
Men	slept	deeply	in	the	first	three	hours	after	midnight	and	already	the	first	hour
had	passed.	He	had	only	a	few	hours	before	sunrise	to	make	his	escape,	cross	the
river,	 meet	 Kaliya,	 and	 deliver	 his	 message,	 take	 a	 bath,	 and	 get	 to	 office	 as
Inspector	of	City	Hygiene.	The	Nagas	had	to	be	ready	when	Shakuni	delivered	his
‘package’.	Though	the	plot	had	been	hatched	months	before,	the	exact	date	had	not
been	 fixed.	 Shakuni	 had	 waited	 for	 the	 time	 to	 be	 right	 and	 today	 the	 fruit	 had
ripened.	 The	 fight	 between	 Bhima	 and	 Suyodhana	 had	 turned	 ugly	 and	 the	 big
Pandava	had	easily	roughed	up	Suyodhana.
A	few	minutes	after	Purochana	left,	Shakuni	opened	his	cupboard	and	took	out	a
bottle	of	wine.	It	was	an	exquisite	vintage	from	Gandhara,	prized	by	the	nobility.
He	also	took	out	a	small	wooden	box	and	tucked	it	into	the	folds	of	his	waistcloth.
He	peered	out	to	see	whether	anyone	stirred	outside.	Except	for	the	howling	of	a
dog	and	the	drone	of	crickets,	all	was	silent.	Shakuni	was	wearing	the	white	silk
shawl	he	had	taken	from	Suyodhana	earlier.	He	walked	quickly	towards	the	north
wing	 of	 the	 palace,	 where	 he	 knew	 Bhima	 slept.	 He	 banged	 on	 the	 door	 thrice
before	a	red-eyed	Bhima	opened	it.
“What	the	hell…”	the	words	died	on	Bhima’s	lips	when	he	saw	the	bottle	Shakuni
dangled	before	his	eyes.
“Please	 come	 in...”	 Bhima	 said,	 compelled	 by	 the	 contents	 of	 the	 bottle	 in	 his
uncle’s	hand.
“Not	 in	 this	 stuffy	 room.	 Such	 exquisite	 wine	 is	 to	 be	 enjoyed	 in	 the	 open	 air.
Come,	let	us	go	to	the	ghats	and	enjoy	this	beauty	from	Gandhara.”
“The	ghats	at	this	hour?”	Bhima	looked	into	the	darkness	beyond	the	window	with
apprehension.	It	was	an	odd	time	to	go	near	the	river.	All	the	superstitious	fears	he
had	accumulated	over	the	years	screamed	in	his	mind.
“Why?	Are	you	afraid	of	the	dark?”	Shakuni	said	with	a	smile,	reading	Bhima’s

thoughts	with	uncanny	accuracy.
Shakuni’s	words	stung	Bhima.	“Am	I	a	child	to	be	afraid	of	the	dark?	Come,	let	us
go,”	he	said,	hurrying	out	of	his	room.
Shakuni	followed,	a	smile	on	his	lips.
***

Suyodhana	did	not	see	anything	unusual	in	class	the	next	morning.	He	did	notice
Bhima’s	absence	but	his	cousin	had	been	irregular	of	late.	If	Drona	minded	such
unauthorized	absences,	he	never	showed	it.	It	would	have	been	another	matter	if
he	or	his	brothers	had	attempted	any	such	thing,	thought	 Suyodhana.	By	evening,
there	 was	 still	 no	 trace	 of	 Bhima.	 Gradually,	 anxiety	 gripped	 the	 Pandavas.
Suyodhana	also	wondered	where	the	idiot	had	disappeared.	Perhaps	he	was	lying
stoned	 somewhere.	 This	 simple	 and	 most	 plausible	 explanation	 was	 offered	 by
Sushasana.	 Aswathama	 did	 not	 say	 anything	 but	 looked	 worried.	 By	 evening,
Suyodhana	found	a	strange	alteration	in	the	way	people	looked	at	him.	The	search
for	 Bhima	 had	 become	 more	 frantic	 and	 soldiers	had	begun	 checking	 the	 whole
city	for	the	missing	Pandava	Prince.
On	the	morning	of	the	second	day,	the	Chief	of	the	Royal	Guards	woke	Suyodhana.
He	did	not	bow	or	look	him	in	the	eye.	Curtly,	he	said,	“Prince,	you	are	arrested
on	suspicion	of	murder	and	the	Court	has	ordered	your	presence.”
“Murder…	what	murder…?”	Suyodhana	tried	to	protest.	When	he	saw	the	steely
eyes	of	Vidhura	behind	the	Chief	of	Guards,	he	knew	argument	would	be	futile.
The	guards	walked	the	Crown	Prince	through	the	glistening	corridors	of	the	palace
and	across	courtyards	verdant	with	blooming	flowers.	Suyodhana	felt	shamed	by
the	 hundreds	 of	 eyes	 that	 peered	 at	 him	 from	 as	 many	 windows.	 He	 wondered
what	crime	he	had	committed.	He	was	soon	to	know.	He	was	to	be	tried	for	the
murder	of	Bhima.

12	THE	TRIAL
WHEN	THE	GUARDS	ENTERED	WITH	SUYODHANA,	the	whole	court	buzzed	with	angry

murmurs.	 King	 Dhritarashtra	 looked	 pale	 and	 anxious	 while	 Queen	 Gandhari’s
face	 seemed	 set	 in	 stone.	 Suyodhana	 saw	 only	 hostile	 looks	 all	 around.	 He	 felt
anger	 building	 in	 him.	 What	 was	 this	 about?	 Being	 tried	 for	 murder?	 Who
murdered	 whom?	 Then	 it	 struck	 him.	 They	 must	 have	 found	 Bhima	 dead	 and	 he
was	 the	 prime	 suspect	 because	 of	 their	 infamous	 rivalry.	 He	 tried	 to	 recollect
what	he	had	said	to	Shakuni	two	days	ago.	He	looked	around	and	saw	the	bitter
hatred	that	burned	in	his	cousins’	eyes.	Arjuna	was	glowering	with	rage.	‘If	it	was
not	for	the	presence	of	Bhishma	and	the	other	elders,	he	would	take	his	revenge	on
me	without	pausing	to	ask	any	questions,’	thought	Suyodhana.
Kunti	 stood	 up	 and	 said	 gravely.	 “He	 killed	 my	 son.	 Is	 there	 no	 justice	 in	 this
country?	 A	 poor	 widow	 cannot	 live	 in	 your	 kingdom	 peacefully.	 My	 son	 was
always	 so	 sweet,	 so	 loving.	 Just	 because	 Prince	 Suyodhana	 could	 not	 get	 the
better	of	him	in	a	straight	fight,	he	has	resorted	to	vile	methods.	My	son	is	dead.
My	 Bhima	 is	 dead.	 Lord	 Bhishma…	 do	 you	 not	 see	 this	 injustice?	 Why	 did
Suyodhana…	 no,	 he	 is	 Duryodhana…	 kill	 him?	 He	 was	 so	 innocent,	 my	 son
Bhima…”
“Kunti,	we	will	find	your	son.	He	is	not	dead.	He	is	just	missing.	We	do	not	have
any	proof	that	he	has	been	killed.	Please	control	your	emotions...”
Kunti	interrupted	Bhishma’s	calming	words.	“Pitamaha,	it	is	my	son	who	is	dead
and	if	I	appear	emotional,	please	bear	with	me.	Please	grant	us	justice	and	punish
the	guilty.”
Dhaumya,	the	young	Brahmin,	stood	up.	”We	should	not	deny	justice	to	a	widow.
The	 curse	 of	 a	 widow	 is	 powerful	 and	 she	 has	 lost	 her	 son.	 Duryodhana	 has
murdered	Bhima.	When	we	already	know	the	character	of	a	person,	we	need	not
wait	 for	 any	 proof	 to	 punish	 him.	 Lack	 of	 proof	 should	 not	 be	 a	 reason	 for	 a
murderer	to	escape.	Instead,	we	should	look	at	his	past	conduct.	Duryodhana	has
always	been	wayward	and	stubborn.	His	Guru	will	vouch	for	this.”

“Dhaumya,”	 Bhishma	 said	 in	 a	 voice	 of	 ice,	 “you	 will	 address	 the	 Prince	 with
courtesy	in	Court.	There	is	no	need	to	use	derogatory	nicknames	to	refer	to	Prince
Suyodhana.”
“He	is	Duryodhana,”	Dhaumya	countered	angrily.
From	 the	 ranks	 of	 the	 Priests	 and	 Kunti’s	 sycophants,	 the	 chant	 arose	 in	 unison,
“Shame	on	Duryodhana.	Duryodhana...	Duryodhana...”
Suyodhana	stood	in	the	middle	of	the	Court,	his	heart	sinking	with	the	weight	of
shame,	for	something	he	had	not	done.	He	wondered	what	he	had	done	to	cause	so
many	people	to	hate	him.	True,	he	had	not	conformed	to	their	ridiculous	ideas	of
purity	of	birth	and	such	nonsense	but	he	had	never	thought	they	would	hate	him	for
just	having	a	different	point	of	view.
“This	 young	 man	 is	 arrogant;	 does	 not	 follow	 the	 rules	 or	 taboos	 of	 our	 holy
smritis;	 moves	 around	 with	 low-castes	 and	 pollutes	 the	 palace.	 He	 is
argumentative,	opinionated	and	adamant	in	his	foolish	ideas.	He	finds	pleasure	in
questioning	 the	 holy	 books.	 With	 his	 puny	 intelligence,	 he	 tries	 to	 argue	 with
scholars	and	 thinks	that	 he	 can	teach	the	 pundits.	 Before	 entering	 the	 temple,	 he
offers	money	and	food	to	the	dirty	beggars	who	throng	and	pollute	our	holy	places.
Many	times,	I	have	received	complaints	from	the	Priests	of	various	temples.	He
laughs	 at	 the	 Priests	 who	 say	 it	 is	 a	 sin	 to	 help	 these	 beggars.	 He	 does	 not
understand	that	by	trying	to	help	the	poor,	he	is	interfering	with	the	laws	of	karma
and	 that	 people	 are	 poor	 or	 rich,	 Brahmin	 or	 Pariah,	 by	 virtue	 of	 the	 karma	 of
their	previous	lives.”
“What	are	you	rambling	about,	Dhaumya?”	The	entire	Court	was	shocked.	Nobody
interfered	 with	 a	 Brahmin	 when	 he	 was	 speaking.	 Bhishma	 was	 getting	 crankier
with	age.
“Your	 Excellency,	 you	 must	 allow	 me	 to	 speak	 and	 prove	 my	 point.”	 Dhaumya
glared	at	the	Grand	Regent.
“This	is	not	the	temple	auditorium.	Reserve	your	sermons	for	where	they	belong.
This	 is	 the	 Court	 of	 Hastinapura.	 We	 are	 here	 to	 discuss	 a	 serious	 allegation	 of
murder.	The	accused	is	the	Crown	Prince	and	we	need	proof,	witnesses,	and	not
your	complaints	about	Suyodhana	not	kow-towing	to	your	ways	of	thinking.	As	far

as	the	Court...”
“As	 per	 scriptures,	 the	 charac–”	 Dhaumya	 was	 stopped	 short	 by	 Bhishma’s
searing	glare.
“Sri	 Dhaumya,	 you	 are	 a	 great	 scholar	 and	 we	 respect	 your	 knowledge	 of	 the
scriptures	and	the	Vedas.	However,	I	must	make	two	things	clear.	The	first	is	that
when	I	am	speaking,	you	will	not	interrupt.	The	second	is	that,	with	all	due	respect
to	 what	 has	 been	 written	 in	 the	 smritis,	 this	 Court	 will	 go	 by	 the	 presence	 or
absence	of	proof.	That	is	how	decisions	in	Court	are	made.	If	that	is	a	sin,	I	am
ready	to	pay	the	price	for	my	bad	karma	in	this	life	or	in	any	life	hereafter.	The
question	is	do	you	have	anything	to	prove	Suyodhana	killed	Bhima?	This	session
is	most	premature.	It	has	not	yet	been	ascertained	that	Bhima	is	dead.	He	has	been
missing	for	two	days.	He	is	not	a	child.	He	is	almost	eighteen	and	boys	of	that	age
have	minds	of	their	own.	He	could	have	just	run	off	to	see	the	world.”
Kunti	 stood	 up	 angrily.	 “Lord	 Bhishma,	 why	 do	 you	 speak	 in	 this	 way?	 I	 will
never	 get	 justice.	 Here,	 there	 is	 neither	 respect	 for	 the	 scriptures	 nor	 value	 for
great	scholars	like	Dhaumya.	But	why	am	I	surprised?	Your	heart	has	become	as
hard	 as	 a	 rock,	 Lord	 Bhishma.	 You	 do	 not	 know	 what	 a	 mother	 feels.	 You	 have
never	married	nor	do	you	know	what	children	mean	to	their	parents.”
There	 was	 perfect	 silence	 in	 the	 Court.	 Suyodhana	 could	 see	 that	 many	 of	 the
women	 watching	 from	 the	 balcony	 were	 wiping	 their	 tears.	 Why	 did	 Uncle
Vidhura	not	interfere?	Suyodhana	tried	to	catch	his	eye	but	the	Prime	Minister	did
not	look	at	him.	He	was	observing	Shakuni.
Yudhishtra	stood	up.	Bowing	in	turn	to	the	Court,	Dhaumya,	Drona,	and	then	the
assembly	 of	Brahmins,	he	requested	permission	 to	speak.	The	Brahmins	blessed
him.	He	then	bowed	to	the	King	and	Queen,	and	Bhishma,	who	looked	irritated	at
this	 elaborate	 show	 of	 reverence.	 The	 eldest	 Pandava	 spoke	 slowly,	 in	 a	 soft
voice.	In	this	way,	he	ensured	everybody	listened	to	him.	It	was	difficult	to	hear
him	 and	 everyone	 in	 the	 sabha	 was	 compelled	 to	 concentrate	 on	 what	 he	 was
saying	as	he	projected	himself	as	a	humble	man	without	ambition:	“I	am	saddened
to	see	my	cousin	Suyodhana	implicated	in	the	murder	of	my	brother,	Bhima.	I	have
always	loved	my	cousin	and	thought	him	to	be	an	honourable	man.	If	there	was	no
witness	 to	 the	 ghastly	 act	 committed	 by	 my	 cousin,	 I	 would	 have	 refused	 to
believe	him	capable	of	such	a	crime.	But	someone	did	see	him.	If	your	Excellency

permits,	we	can	present	the	witness.”
Suyodhana	lifted	his	head	in	surprise.	A	witness?	What	was	this?
“If	 you	 have	 a	 witness,	 present	 him.	 What	 are	 we	 waiting	 for?”	 Bhishma	 asked
irritably.
“The	 witness	 is	 a...	 err…	 he	 is	 an	 Untouchable	 and	 cannot	 enter	 the	 palace	 and
sabha	to	testify,”	Yudhishtra	murmured.
“Prince	Yudhishtra,	I	am	surprised	at	you.	Why	should	his	caste	matter?”
“Swami,	 his	presence	will	pollute	 the	palace	and	sabha.	 He	 is	 of	 the	 lowest	 of
low	 castes,	 a	 Nishada.	 They	 are	 not	 even	 allowed	 in	 the	 roads	 that	 lead	 to	 the
palace.	So	how	can	he	enter	here	and	testify?”	Dhaumya	said	loudly.	The	group	of
Priests	nodded	their	heads	in	agreement.
“If	you	cannot	provide	any	proof	and	do	not	allow	your	own	witness	to	enter	this
Court,	 I	 will	 have	 no	 choice	 but	 to	 dismiss	 this	 case	 and	 declare	 Prince
Suyodhana	 innocent.	 I	 cannot...”	 Bhishma	 stopped	 in	 mid-sentence,	 looking	 at
Dhaumya	in	irritation.	The	Priest	had	stood	up	to	speak	again.
“We	have	discussed	the	matter	and	the	learned	scholars	are	of	the	opinion	that	the
Untouchable	may	be	allowed	in	as	an	exceptional	case.	There	are	provisions	for	it
in	 the	 shastras.	 But	 the	 King	 will	 have	 to	 do	 penance	 for	 this	 sin.	 A	 thousand
Brahmins	will	have	to	be	fed	and	gifts	given	to	them...”
“The	 King	 will	 do	 no	 such	 thing,”	 Bhishma	 pronounced,	 his	 voice	 shaking	 with
anger.	 “If	 you	 wish	 to	 bring	 forward	 a	 witness,	 do	 so	 without	 conditions
attached…”
Kunti	stood	up	and	started	walking	away.	“My	sons,	there	is	no	point	to	this.	We
are	never	going	to	get	justice	here.”	Her	four	sons	stood	up	to	join	her.
Eyes	glittering	with	rage,	Bhishma	stood	up.	However,	before	he	could	speak,	the
King	 spoke	 in	 a	 soft	 voice.	 “I	 agree	 to	 the	 penance.	 I	 will	 do	 whatever	 the
Brahmins	 ask.	 Let	 the	 truth	 come	 out.	 If	 my	 son	 has	 indeed	 committed	 murder,	 I
will	not	spare	him.”

Bhishma	sat	down	wearily	and	gestured	to	the	guards	to	bring	in	the	witness.	They
dragged	in	a	dark	boy	of	about	seventeen.	He	was	small	for	his	age	and	his	ribs
showed	 clearly	 through	 his	 skin.	 He	 had	 curly	 hair	 and	 thick	 lips.	 But	 what
arrested	 the	 attention	 of	 everyone	 was	 a	 horrible	 disfigurement.	 The	 left	 side	 of
his	body	and	face	was	burnt	and	the	skin	had	turned	a	dull,	rippled	gold,	while	the
rest	of	his	body	remained	dark.	He	looked	around	the	Court	in	terror.	The	luxury
of	 his	 surroundings	 overwhelmed	 him.	 He	 did	 not	 know	 who	 the	 King	 was	 but
bowed	deeply	with	his	eyes	lowered.
“Do	not	be	afraid.	No	will	harm	you.	Answer	my	questions	honestly	and	you	will
soon	be	free	to	go.	What	is	your	name?”	asked	Bhishma.
“Jara,”	the	boy	whispered.	A	guard	prodded	him	with	a	stick	and	hissed	in	his	ear
that	 he	 should	 cover	 his	 mouth	 with	 his	 hands	 when	 he	 spoke	 to	 his	 superiors.
Jara’s	hand	immediately	went	up	over	his	thick	lips.	He	was	shivering	with	fear.
“Remove	your	hands,	stand	up	straight	and	answer	me,	Jara,”	Bhishma	barked.
Jara	dropped	his	hands	and	stood	up	as	he	had	been	ordered.	There	were	angry
whispers	all	around	but	Bhishma	ignored	them	and	continued,	“Son,	what	did	you
see?	Explain	clearly.”
“Swami,	 two	 nights	 ago,	 I	 was	 near	 the	 temple	 that	 sits	 on	 the	 rock…	 near	 the
river.”
Immediately	the	court	erupted	into	disorder.	Some	Priests	shouted	out	asking	how
a	 Nishada	 had	 dared	 to	 go	 near	 a	 temple,	 while	 others	 lamented	 loudly	 that
dharma	was	 wilting	 and	 the	 age	 of	 Kali	was	 near.	 Jara	 looked	 terrified	 by	 the
ruckus	he	had	caused.
Bhishma	 waited	 for	 the	 shouting	 to	 die	 down	 and	 then	 said	 to	 Jara,	 “Do	 not	 be
afraid.	You	have	done	nothing	wrong.	Why	were	you	there	in	the	first	place?”
“I	 went	 there	 for	 food,	 Swami.	 You	 know	 that	 every	 day	 the	 temple	 feeds
thousands	of	Brahmins.	Swami,	they	do	not	eat	everything	served	and	waste	a	lot
of	food.	The	waste	bins	overflow	with	leftover	food,	really	delicious	food.	I	go
there	on	most	nights.	Sometimes	other	people	 like	me	go	too	 and	then	there	is	a
fight	for	the	leftovers.	Dogs	and	rats	fight	for	the	food	too.	I	am	always	hungry	so

when	everyone	has	gone	to	sleep,	I	go	there	to	forage	for	food.	That	night	I	was
alone,	Swami.”	Jara	paused	and	looked	around.	Many	turned	their	faces	away	or
covered	their	mouths	to	avoid	any	contamination	from	the	Nishada.
“How	 disgusting!”	 Dhaumya	 commented.	 Jara	 gave	 the	 man	 who	 found	 him	 so
repulsive,	a	black-toothed	smile.
Bhishma	 nodded	 to	 Jara,	 gesturing	 for	 him	 to	 continue.	 “I	 saw	 a	 very	 tall	 and
well-built	man	sitting	on	the	rock	near	the	temple;	close	to	the	river…	he	was	with
someone	 wearing	 a	 white	 shawl.	 They	 were	 drinking.	 After	 some	 time,	 the	 big
man	 began	 singing	 in	 a	 horrible	 voice.	 He	 was	 sitting	 dangerously	 close	 to	 the
edge	of	the	rock	and	the	man	in	the	shawl	pushed	him	into	the	river	with	a	splash.	I
was	 afraid	 to	 remain	 any	 longer	 and	 ran	 away	 since	 I	 was	 in	 a	 place	 I	 was	 not
supposed	to	be.	I	was	afraid	the	man	with	the	white	shawl	would	kill	me	too,	if	he
saw	me.	The	guards	caught	me,	Swami.	They	saw	me	running	from	the	temple	and
thought	I	was	a	thief.	For	the	last	two	days	they	have	thrashed	me,”	Jara	finished.
Suyodhana	stood	in	the	middle	of	the	sabha,	looking	shocked.	He	was	wearing	a
white	silk	shawl	like	any	other	day.	Hundreds	of	eyes	had	already	pronounced	him
guilty.	 The	 King	 had	 turned	 pale	 and	 Queen	 Gandhari	 was	 gripping	 her	 hands
together.	Bhishma	called	to	Vidhura	to	consult	with	him	and	the	Court	erupted	in
frenzied	discussion.
Before	 Vidhura	 could	 move,	 Dhaumya	 stood	 up.	 “Your	 Excellency,	 do	 we	 need
any	further	proof?”
Bhishma	addressed	Jara	again.	“Can	you	identify	the	person	in	the	white	shawl?”
Jara	scanned	the	crowd	slowly.	Shakuni	went	pale	with	fear.	Everything	had	gone
according	to	plan	and	Takshaka	would	return	the	packet	any	time	now.	He	had	not
pushed	Bhima	into	the	river	to	kill	the	Prince.	That	would	have	been	too	easy.	He
had	been	playing	for	a	much	higher	stake	–	to	seal	the	enmity	between	the	sons	of
his	sister	and	their	cousins.	If	the	Untouchable	identified	him,	it	would	upset	all
his	plans.	The	touch	of	using	Suyodhana’s	shawl	had	been	a	last	minute	addition	to
his	plan.	He	had	reasoned	that	any	overzealous	guard	on	the	alert	that	night	would
conclude	it	was	Suyodhana	taking	a	stroll	with	his	cousin	and	let	them	be.	In	fact,
he	 had	 been	 counting	 on	 one	 of	 the	 guards	 being	 witness	 to	 ‘Suyodhana’	 and
Bhima	 leaving	 the	 palace	 in	 the	 dead	 of	 night.	 But	 he	 had	 not	 accounted	 for	 a

witness	like	Jara.
Jara’s	eyes	rested	on	Suyodhana	and	his	characteristic	white	shawl.	There	was	a
collective	 sucking	 in	 of	 breaths	 in	 the	 Court.	 Bhishma	 looked	 at	 Vidhura,	 who
gravely	 nodded	 his	 head.	 The	 entire	 Court	 waited	 expectantly	 for	 Bhishma’s
words.	At	that	moment,	there	was	a	commotion	at	the	far	end	of	the	hall	and	every
head	turned	towards	the	main	door.	A	group	of	guards	was	trying	to	push	away	the
throbbing	 crowds.	 But	 what	 caught	 everyone’s	 attention	 was	 the	 huge	 figure	 of
Bhima	amidst	the	guards,	gazing	at	the	assembly	with	a	lopsided	grin.
“What	 the…”	 Dhaumya	 stopped	 the	 curse	 that	 was	 on	 the	 tip	 of	 his	 tongue	 by
biting	his	lip.
Kunti	 ran	 towards	 her	 son	 and	 hugged	 him	 as	 if	 she	 would	 never	 let	 go.	 Bhima
looked	pleased	and	embarrassed	at	the	same	time.	When	the	confusion	died	down,
Bhishma	spoke	again,	asking	Bhima	where	he	had	been.
Bhima	 looked	 at	 the	 assembly	 and	 the	 hostile	 eyes	 all	 around	 and	 winced.	 His
experiences	over	the	last	two	days	had	been	fantastic	but	he	was	not	sure	whether
they	were	in	fact	true	or	part	of	a	drug-induced	fantasy.	He	began	talking	and	the
elite	assembly	listened	to	the	impossible	story	with	a	growing	 sense	 of	wonder,
scepticism	and	finally,	amusement.	It	was	evident	that	Bhima	was	stoned	from	the
moment	he	opened	his	mouth.	He	spoke	of	the	wonderful	world	of	the	Nagas.	Two
nights	ago,	a	Gandharva	had	called	him	in	his	dreams,	to	fly	over	the	Ganga.	The
creature	 had	 offered	 him	 a	 special	 potion,	 saying	 it	 would	 give	 him	 magical
powers.	Bhima	 had	taken	the	potion	and	the	Gandharva	had	pushed	him	into	the
river.	Bhima	had	flown	over	the	Ganga	for	some	time	and	finally	fallen	into	a	sea
of	milk	and	honey.	The	Nagas	had	saved	him	from	the	sweet-smelling	nectar	and
taken	him	to	their	magical	world.	He	had	met	the	Naga	King,	Takshaka,	who	had
been	a	charming	host.	Bhima	had	met	the	most	gorgeous	women	and	had	a	good
time.	When	Bhima	began	describing	his	exploits	with	the	Naga	women,	Bhishma
lost	 his	 temper	 and	 banged	 his	 hands	 on	 the	 armrest	 of	 his	 chair.	 That	 stopped
Bhima’s	flight	of	fancy	and	brought	him	back	to	the	real	world.
He	looked	around	to	see	the	hostile	eyes	of	the	Brahmins	and	wondered	what	he
had	done	wrong.	His	brother	Yudhishtra	was	hanging	his	head	in	shame,	as	were
Arjuna	 and	 his	 other	 siblings.	 Sushasana	 and	 Aswathama	 were	 grinning,	 while
Suyodhana	 was	 looking	 at	 him	 with	 relief,	 pity,	 and	 revulsion.	 Kunti	 was	 biting

her	lip	nervously.	Suddenly	Gandhari	began	to	laugh.	Dhritarashtra	joined	in	with
a	chuckle,	and	then	the	entire	assembly	broke	into	laughter.	A	smile	twitched	on
Bhishma’s	lips	and	grew	into	a	rare	smile	when	he	saw	Dhaumya’s	face	turn	red
with	 embarrassment.	 Only	 Vidhura	 remained	 grave	 as	 he	 observed	 Shakuni’s
reaction.	He	did	not	like	the	look	of	relief	on	the	Gandhara	Prince’s	face.	Vidhura
was	sure	that	somewhere	in	this	farce	lay	the	deadly	hand	of	this	foreigner.
“My	son	is	tired	and	traumatized	by	what	he	has	gone	through,	Pitamaha,”	Kunti
pleaded.
“I	 agree	 Kunti.	 He	 is	 not	 normal,”	 Bhishma	 said	 with	 wry	 humour.	 Some	 of	 the
assembly	roared	with	laughter.	Vidhura’s	grave	face	lightened	at	last.
“Swami,	 Bhima	 has	 undergone	 the	 trauma	 of	 near	 death	 and	 he	 is	 afraid	 of
Duryodhana.	 I	 am	 sure	 we	 will	 get	 the	 facts	 if	 we	 have	 this	 trial	 tomorrow,”
Dhaumya	broke	in.
Vidhura	 collected	 the	 palm	 leaf	 strips	 from	 every	 member	 of	 the	 Council	 of
Ministers.	Vidhura	stamped	them	with	the	Royal	seal	and	handed	them	over	to	the
Grand	 Regent.	 Bhishma	 took	 his	 time	 to	 read	 each	 one.	 He	 put	 eight	 of	 them	 on
one	side	and	two	on	the	other.	Then	he	looked	up	and	said,	“Sri	Dhaumya,	what
Bhima	needs	now	is	some	antidote	to	whatever	drug	he	has	taken.	The	Court	does
not	have	time	to	hear	the	drug-induced	fantasies	of	a	stoned	man.	There	will	be	no
trial	 tomorrow.	 I	 am	 passing	 judgement	 now.	 His	 Highness,	 the	 King,	 will	 take
action	as	he	deems	fit	on	the	advice	I	give.	The	Council	of	Ministers	has	voted,
eight	 to	 two,	 that	 Prince	 Suyodhana	 is	 innocent	 of	 all	 charges.	 The	 Council
advises	the	Court	be	dismissed	for	the	day.	It	shall	reconvene	tomorrow	to	discuss
matters	of	State.”
“So	 be	 it.”	 King	 Dhritarashtra	 stood	 up	 and	 assistants	 rushed	 to	 help	 the	 blind
couple	from	the	dais.
There	were	angry	protests	from	the	Brahmins	but	Dhaumya	kept	his	cool.	He	knew
when	 to	 keep	 a	 low	 profile.	 He	 walked	 over	 to	 the	 Pandavas.	 A	 few	 Brahmins
followed	 the	 King	 to	 remind	 him	 about	 the	 penance	 of	 feeding	 a	 thousand
Brahmins.	 The	 tired	 King	 wearily	 agreed	 and	 walked	 to	 his	 chamber	 with	 his
wife.

***

Sushasana	and	Aswathama	joined	Suyodhana	and	hugged	the	Prince	joyfully.	As
the	Court	emptied,	Vidhura	tapped	Suyodhana	on	the	 shoulder	and	informed	him
that	the	Grand	Regent	was	waiting	for	him.	The	Prince	followed	Vidhura	with	a
sinking	 heart,	 bracing	 himself	 for	 a	 tongue-lashing	 from	 his	 granduncle.	 As	 he
entered	 Bhishma’s	 private	 chamber,	 he	 was	 surprised	 to	 find	 a	 guest	 there.	 The
man	 looked	 to	 be	 in	 his	 late	 twenties	 but	 his	 composure,	 confidence	 and	 calm,
belied	 such	 a	 young	 age.	 The	 way	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 was	 treating	 him	 told
Suyodhana	he	was	in	the	presence	of	a	remarkable	man.
The	 man	 stood	 up	 with	 a	 smile	 when	 he	 saw	 the	 Prince.	 Bhishma	 too,
acknowledged	Suyodhana	by	raising	his	right	hand	in	blessing.	The	Prince	bowed
to	the	Grand	Regent	and	stood	reverently	as	Vidhura	took	his	place	to	Bhishma’s
right.	Bhishma	smiled	and	said,	“Suyodhana,	meet	Balarama,	Head	of	the	Yadava
Council.	He	is	a	close	friend	and	a	man	of	great	wisdom	and	distinction.	I	have
called	him	here	for	a	purpose.”
“Sir,	you	embarrass	me	with	your	kind	words,”	Balarama	said	with	a	smile	that	lit
the	whole	room.	“Suyodhana,	I	have	heard	much	about	you.	I	am	a	mere	cowherd
and	not	a	King.	There	are	no	Kings	among	the	Yadavas.	We	are	a	republic	and	I
am	the	elected	Head.	I	hold	my	position	at	the	will	of	my	people.”
Impulse	 rather	 than	 cold	 logic	 always	 defined	 Suyodhana’s	 response	 to	 people.
Now	he	felt	an	instant	liking	for	the	Yadava	leader	and	beamed	at	him.
“When	Vidhura	told	me	Balarama	was	passing	through	Hastinapura	on	his	way	to
Kashi,	 I	 thought	 I	 would	 request	 his	 help	 for	 you,	 Suyodhana.	 Your	 lack	 of
confidence,	 your	 habit	 of	 getting	 into	 trouble	 with	 powerful	 people,	 and	 your
constant	fights	with	your	cousins,	worries	me	not	a	little.	Drona	too,	is	not	fond	of
you	and	says	you	are	rebellious	and	do	not	show	him	respect.	With	Sushasana,	I
will	tolerate	such	complaints,	but	not	with	you.	You	are	going	to	rule	this	land	one
day	 and	 such	 habits	 are	 not	 going	 to	 make	 you	 a	 good	 King,”	 Bhishma	 said,
coming	to	the	point	as	usual.
Suyodhana	 felt	 annoyed	 at	 being	 humiliated	 before	 a	 stranger.	 But	 Balarama
smiled	and	said	to	Bhishma,	“Sir,	you	are	too	harsh.	I	first	heard	about	Suyodhana
when	the	travelling	singers	visited	my	new	city	of	Dwaraka.	They	sang	about	the

greatness	 of	 Arjuna,	 the	 middle	 Pandava	 Prince.	 They	 narrated	 the	 now	 famous
test	Guru	Drona	set	his	students,	asking	them	what	they	saw	in	a	parrot	on	a	tree.
Everyone	found	Arjuna’s	answer	admirable	–	that	he	saw	only	the	target,	the	eye
of	the	bird.	It	was	spoken	like	a	true	warrior	and	the	bards	were	full	of	praise.	My
brother	Krishna	declared	in	our	assembly	that	here	at	last	was	a	young	warrior	all
of	 India	 could	 admire.	 But	 the	 bards	 also	 spoke	 derisively	 about	 Suyodhana’s
reply	–	that	he	saw	love	in	the	parrot’s	eyes	and	refused	to	shoot	the	bird,	which
Arjuna	 then	 shot	 down	 so	 brilliantly.	 When	 I	 heard	 the	 story,	 I	 thought	 Arjuna
might	 perhaps	 be	 the	 warrior	 India	 wanted,	 but	 Suyodhana	 was	 the	 man	 India
needed.”
Suyodhana	 blushed	 as	 he	 looked	 at	 this	 uncommon	 man.	 The	 answer	 had	 come
naturally	to	him	and	he	had	suffered	a	great	deal	of	mockery	from	his	peers	and
elders	for	his	unmanly	reply.	Though	he	was	sure	he	would	say	the	same	thing	if
asked	again,	he	also	wished	the	incident	to	be	forgotten.
Bhishma	suppressed	a	smile	and	said,	“Balarama,	I	do	not	know	what	to	do	with
this	boy.	Sometimes	I	see	myself	in	him,	as	I	was	in	my	youth.	The	emotions	he
expresses,	 the	 sympathy	 he	 shows,	 are	 all	 qualities	 I	 admire.	 However,	 I	 never
allowed	 my	 heart	 to	 rule	 my	 head,	 not	 even	 in	 my	 teens.	 The	 poor	 will	 always
suffer	 oppression;	 what	 they	 will	 not	 forgive	 is	 the	 patronizing	 attitude	 of	 those
better	off.	I	had	the	wisdom	to	know	that	acts	of	charity	would	not	change	anything
and	 that	 we	 would	 have	 to	 work	 slowly	 to	 change	 the	 system,	 not	 toppling	 it	 in
haste.	I	despise	the	caste	system	but	I	have	always	been	careful	to	take	a	balanced
view.	This	boy	is	impulsive	and	incorrigible.	He	fights	with	the	wrong	people	for
the	right	reasons	and	is	making	powerful	enemies.	I	cannot	let	it	continue...	he	is
growing	up	to	be	a	kind-hearted	fool.
“I	leave	him	in	your	hands,	Balarama.	I	hope	you	have	a	month	to	spare	to	make	a
man	of	this	fool.	And	let	me	tell	you	something	else.	If	Drona	had	asked	me	that
question,	 I	 too	 might	 have	 answered	 the	 way	 Suyodhana	 did,	 but	 I	 would
nevertheless	have	followed	through	with	a	well-shot	arrow	that	would	have	killed
the	poor	parrot	and	ended	its	suffering	quickly.”	With	that,	Bhishma	left	the	room
with	faithful	Vidhura	following	behind.
An	 amused	 Balarama	 stood	 shaking	 his	 head.	 The	 silence	 that	 ensued	 was
embarrassing.	The	Prince	did	not	know	what	to	say	to	the	smiling	stranger.	‘I	am
no	 fool,’	 he	 wanted	 to	 protest,	 but	 he	 was	 not	 too	 sure	 of	 the	 truth	 of	 such	 an

assertion.	 He	 looked	 away,	 beyond	 the	 casements,	 at	 the	 main	 street	 that	 wound
through	the	bustling	bazaars	and	saw	a	couple	of	soldiers	driving	a	black	man	like
a	bullock	while	people	moved	away	in	horror.	They	beat	the	man	with	canes	so	he
would	walk	faster	and	move	off	the	highway	quickly.	The	poor	man	was	crying	in
pain	and	calling	piteously,	“Krishna…	Krishna...	save	me”.	Suyodhana	saw	to	his
dismay	that	the	people	were	horrified	not	by	the	man’s	suffering	but	because	they
were	 afraid	 of	 the	 pollution	 the	 Untouchable	 could	 cause	 them	 by	 accidental
contact.	Suyodhana	recognised	the	man	being	treated	like	a	beast	of	burden	–	he
was	the	witness	who	had	come	to	testify	against	him	–	Jara.
“It	is	my	brother.”	Balarama’s	voice	behind	him	startled	Suyodhana.	The	Yadava
leader	was	gazing	at	the	same	sight.	Suyodhana	looked	up	at	him	in	surprise.	“No,
not	the	poor	beggar,”	Balarama	said.	“He	is	praying	to	my	brother,	Krishna,	who
is	 quite	 a	 charmer	 and	 has	 started	 playing	 God	 recently.	 Many	 believe	 he	 is	 the
avatar	spoken	of	in	the	holy	books.”
“Do	you	believe	it?”	Suyodhana	asked	in	surprise,	glad	the	ice	had	been	broken.
“What…	 my	 brother	 being	 God?	 Ha	 ha!	 I	 believe	 he	 loves	 playing	 practical
jokes.	Nevertheless,	on	another	level,	I	do	believe	everyone	has	God	within	them,
so	 there	 is	 no	 falsehood	 in	 claiming	 Godhood.	 By	 the	 way,	 is	 there	 any	 truth	 to
Bhishma’s	complaints	about	you?”
The	directness	of	the	query	took	Suyodhana	aback.	His	instincts	told	him	to	trust
this	man.	All	that	lay	suppressed	in	his	mind	burst	forth.	The	Prince	told	Balarama
how	he	abhorred	violence	and	how	it	made	him	an	indifferent	warrior.	He	said	he
did	 not	 find	 glory	 in	 harming	 others.	 He	 said	 that	 he	 hated	 the	 competitive	 and
combative	 one-upmanship	 that	 society	 demanded	 and	 which	 Gurus	 like	 Drona
expected	 from	 their	 students.	 He	 spoke	 passionately	 about	 the	 hatred	 he	 felt
towards	his	cousins	and	how	he	wished	them	dead.	Though	it	contradicted	his	talk
of	 non-violence,	 Balarama	 seemed	 not	 to	 notice	 it.	 Suyodhana	 finally	 ended	 his
tirade	and	stood	in	silence.
Balarama	did	not	reply	for	what	seemed	an	age.	Then	he	said	slowly,	“Suyodhana,
it	is	your	fear	that	speaks.	You	mistake	it	for	kindness,	abhorrence	of	violence,	etc.
You	 are	 afraid	 of	 the	 superior	 skills	 of	 your	 cousins	 and	 your	 own	 failure.	 You
have	a	good	heart	and	are	intelligent,	but	that	is	not	enough	to	survive	and	succeed
in	 life.	 The	 hatred	 you	 feel	 towards	 your	 cousins	 is	 consuming	 you.	 There	 is	 no

need	 to	 hate	 anyone,	 however	 repugnant	 his	 acts	 may	 be.	 Hate	 the	 deed,	 not	 the
person.	You	are	right	in	saying	you	hate	the	mindless	competition	of	modern	times;
the	often	pathological	pursuit	of	material	pleasures	at	the	cost	of	all	humanity;	the
indifference	of	the	successful	classes	towards	their	less	fortunate	brethren;	and	the
vice-like	grip	of	caste,	regionalism,	gender	bias,	violence,	fanaticism,	corruption,
sycophancy,	nepotism	and	terrorism,	on	the	people.	One	should	hate	these	things.
But	what	are	you	doing	about	it?	People	like	you	sit	in	their	cosy	chambers	and
complain	about	how	things	are.	You	take	a	token	tour	of	the	slums	and	patronize
the	poor.	Why	do	you	not	make	a	few	statements	to	declare	your	hatred	of	these
evils	and	make	some	noise	in	public	places	–	to	convince	yourself	and	a	few	other
poor	 souls,	 that	 you	 are	 indeed	 a	 champion	 of	 such	 causes?	 Are	 you	 taking	 any
concrete	 action	 to	 change	 the	 system?”	 Balarama	 paused	 and	 Suyodhana	 looked
even	more	confused.
“I	am	not	helping	you	understand	am	I,	Prince?	I	am	not	a	good	speaker	or	Guru,
so	I	will	put	it	in	simple	language.	I	have	an	aim	in	my	life.	It	is	to	make	our	land
prosperous	again	through	agriculture	and	trade.	We	have	lost	the	traditions	of	the
Asuras,	who	were	great	seafarers.	We	have	lost	the	traditions	of	the	Nagas	–	they
were	farmers	who	tamed	the	earth	and	made	the	soil	yield	gold.	I	want	to	lead	my
people	 away	 from	 their	 primitive	 existence	 as	 a	 pastoral	 community	 or	 huntergathers	and	take	them	back	to	that	lost	glory.	Taboos	and	religion	have	shackled
us.	I	strive	to	break	free.	You	may	wonder	how	a	single	man	can	do	all	this	and
that	is	precisely	the	point.	I	have	a	goal	that	is	too	big	for	me.	It	fills	me	with	a
passion	to	live	and	achieve.	I	enjoy	every	moment	of	my	life	and	ensure	that	I	take
a	step	forward	every	second,	towards	my	aim.	You	should	visit	the	beautiful	port
city	I	am	building.	Dwaraka	is	my	dream!	Do	you	have	such	a	dream?	A	dream
that	 is	 bigger	 than	 you;	 that	 you	 feel	 is	 impossible	 or	 even	 ridiculous	 to	 think
about?”
Suyodhana	 was	 not	 sure	 how	 to	 answer.	 Did	 he	 have	 such	 a	 dream?	 His	 ideas
were	vague,	he	acted	on	impulse	and	refused	to	follow	everything	the	Guru	said	or
the	scriptures	demanded,	without	questioning	it	first.	But	he	did	not	know	whether
he	had	an	all-consuming	passion.
Seeing	the	confusion	in	the	young	Prince’s	face,	Balarama	continued,	“Suyodhana,
you	may	not	be	sure	whether	you	have	such	a	dream	but	it	is	there,	you	are	just	too
young	 to	 recognize	 it.	 I	 will	 give	 you	 a	 method	 to	 discover	 the	 dream	 hiding	 in
your	heart.	What	makes	you	passionate,	angry,	irritated,	frustrated,	happy	and	sad

at	the	same	time?	What	makes	you	feel	alive?”
Suyodhana	immediately	said,	“Sir,	I	felt	angry,	irritated,	happy	and	sad	seeing	that
young	 Untouchable	 they	 brought	 to	 Court	 today.	 I	 was	 angered	 by	 his	 plight,
irritated	 that	 he	 testified	 against	 me,	 happy	 that	 he	 was	 getting	 a	 chance	 to	 see
what	is	forbidden	to	people	like	him;	and	sad	that	he	was	being	manipulated.	I	feel
the	same	passion	when	I	see	our	dirty	streets	and	the	people	living	like	filthy	pigs.
I	 feel	 angry	 at	 the	 system	 and	 traditions	 that	 keep	 them	 living	 like	 that.	 I	 feel
irritated	that	they	do	not	wake	up	and	fight.	But	I	admire	their	resilience.	I	admire
how	they	still	manage	to	make	a	living	out	of	nothing.	I	am	frustrated	that	I	cannot
do	anything	about	it	and	saddened	to	see	so	many	live	in	misery	in	my	land.”
Balarama	 smiled	 and	 touched	 Suyodhana’s	 shoulder.	 “It	 is	 a	 beginning.	 This
conversation	 will	 not	 change	 your	 life.	 Nevertheless,	 you	 have	 found	 a	 ray	 of
light.	Work	on	it.	Your	dream	of	a	misery-free	society	is	too	big	and	ridiculous.	It
will	 give	 you	 a	 purpose	 in	 life.	 Better	 men	 have	 tried	 and	 failed.	 Every	 era
produces	 men	 who	 dare	 to	 dream	 the	 impossible.	 They	 are	 not	 perfect	 human
beings	or	incarnations	of	Gods	on	our	poor	earth.	They	are	mere	mortals	and	have
many	faults.	Many	who	tried,	failed	by	a	whisker,	but	that	did	not	take	away	the
sheen	of	their	achievements.	I	have	trained	myself	to	dream.	So	has	Bhishma	and
Carvaka,	 the	 atheist.	 Our	 methods	 are	 different,	 yet	 our	 aim	 is	 the	 same.	 Who
knows	which	path	is	right?	Perhaps	my	path	of	peace	and	meditation	and	belief	in
a	higher	power	to	guide	my	conscience,	is	the	right	one.	Perhaps	the	practicality	of
Bhishma,	 who	 feels	 change	 has	 to	 be	 worked	 slowly	 and	 if	 required,	 with
violence,	 is	 right.	 Maybe	 Carvaka	 knows	 best	 and	 there	 is	 no	 God,	 and	 human
beings	have	to	love	and	be	compassionate	towards	one	other	and	enjoy	life	to	the
hilt.	Perhaps	we	are	all	wrong.	It	does	not	matter.	The	dream	is	what	counts.”
“You	 talk	 of	 peace	 and	 non-violence	 but	 there	 is	 violence	 everywhere	 in	 the
world.	 I	 too,	 think	 non-violence	 is	 the	 right	 way,	 but	 I	 am	 faced	 with	 violence.
Bhima	harasses	me	every	day	and	because	I	hate	arms,	I	have	not	acquired	enough
skill	to	defend	myself,”	Suyodhana	blurted	out,	immediately	regretting	his	words.
What	he	had	said	sounded	so	commonplace	next	to	what	Balarama	had	said	with
such	passion.
Balarama	 smiled	 at	 him.	 “Let	 us	 go	 outside.	 Call	 your	 brother	 Sushasana,	 and
Aswathama	 too.	 One	 of	 His	 Excellency	 Bhishma’s	 requests	 is	 that	 I	 instil	 an
interest	in	arms	in	you.”	Balarama	began	walking	towards	the	door.

This	 sudden	 order	 mildly	 irritated	 Suyodhana.	 Balarama	 had	 not	 answered	 his
questions.	But	Sushasana	and	Aswathama	were	waiting	outside.	When	Suyodhana
introduced	them,	they	immediately	bowed	to	the	Yadava	leader.
“Go	and	get	the	maces,	the	heavy	ones,”	Balarama	ordered.	Sushasana	quickly	ran
off	in	great	excitement	to	get	the	weapons.
They	walked	towards	the	practice	grounds	as	Sushasana	and	a	guard	returned	with
maces	of	different	sizes,	a	few	swords	and	daggers,	and	even	bows	and	arrows.
Balarama	 tried	 every	 weapon	 for	 weight	 and	 build,	 commenting	 on	 the	 superior
workmanship	of	the	Hastinapura	arms.	Then	he	took	up	a	heavy	mace	and	handed
it	to	Suyodhana.	He	took	one	himself	and	invited	Suyodhana	to	face	him.	Balarama
quickly	 stripped	 down	 to	 his	 loincloth	 and	 made	 Suyodhana	 do	 the	 same.
Suyodhana	 observed	 that	 the	 Yadava	 leader	 was	 built	 like	 an	 ox	 and	 muscles
rippled	 all	 over	 his	 body.	 Sushasana	 and	 Aswathama	 sucked	 in	 their	 breath	 in
admiration	as	Balarama	spread	his	legs	and	raised	the	mace	in	combat	position.
Then,	without	warning,	he	attacked	the	bewildered	Suyodhana.
“Defend	 yourself	 fool!	 Hit	 back!	 Move...”	 Balarama	 screamed	 at	 the	 confused
Prince.	Suyodhana	tried	to	remember	all	the	lessons	he	had	learnt	from	Drona,	but
Balarama	was	all	over	him	like	a	typhoon,	raining	blows	on	him	mercilessly.	In
less	 than	 a	 minute,	 Balarama’s	 strong	 legs	 had	 pinned	 Suyodhana	 firmly	 to	 the
ground.	He	mockingly	raised	the	mace	and	brought	it	gently	down	on	Suyodhana’s
head.	He	looked	at	Aswathama	and	Sushasana,	who	obligingly	cried	out,	“Phut!”
gesturing	with	their	hands	to	indicate	an	exploding	head.	They	laughed	as	an	angry
Suyodhana	squirmed	under	Balarama’s	right	foot.
Suyodhana	looked	at	them	angrily	and	was	about	to	curse	when	his	heart	jumped
into	 his	 mouth.	 He	 was	 not	 sure	 whether	 it	 was	 a	 hallucination	 or	 what	 he	 saw
was	in	fact	real.	He	gaped	at	the	beautiful	girl	standing	near	Aswathama,	laughing
at	his	plight.	Did	such	beauty	exist	in	the	world?	He	observed	her	perfect	teeth,
the	sparkling	eyes	and	small	nose,	which	tilted	slightly	upward,	her	rosy	cheeks
and	perfect	body.	His	heart	sank.	He	was	not	making	a	favourable	impression	on
the	ground.	Her	eyes	met	his	and	then	looked	away,	shy	and	embarrassed.
“No	wonder	you	hate	violence,	Suyodhana!	Non-violence	is	the	 first	 defence	 of
the	coward,”	said	Balarama,	while	the	others	laughed.	“Do	you	know	why	Bhima
beats	 you	 every	 time?	 Because	 he	 fights	 with	 passion.	 His	 passion	 might	 be

selfish,	maybe	he	wants	to	get	the	better	of	you	or	prove	he	is	superior,	but	still	he
fights	 with	 passion.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 get	 the	 better	 of	 him,	 fight	 with	 even	 greater
passion.	 The	 greater	 the	 passion,	 the	 better	 you	 will	 fight.	 I	 will	 give	 you	 a
mantra.	You	were	telling	me	what	you	felt	when	you	saw	that	poor	Untouchable
today.	Every	time	you	act,	imagine	his	face.	Let	the	face	of	that	poor	man	remind
you	of	your	impossible	dream.	Before	every	deed,	think	about	how	it	will	affect
that	poor	man	and	countless	others	like	him.	Fighting	for	glory	is	a	small	passion.
Fighting	 for	 the	 voiceless,	 powerless,	 ignorant	 and	 poor,	 will	 put	 fire	 in	 your
veins	and	give	your	muscles	 incredible	power.	 Then	you	will	not	be	alone.	The
whole	Universe	will	come	to	your	aid.	Who	can	stop	you	then?	Now	get	up	and
fight	like	a	man.”	Balarama	lifted	his	foot	from	Suyodhana’s	chest	and	helped	him
up.	The	girl	stifled	a	giggle	and	Suyodhana	blushed.	“Now	block	that!”	Balarama
lashed	out	at	Suyodhana,	who	stumbled	and	fell	again.
The	girl	and	his	friends	were	laughing	hysterically.	Suyodhana	felt	his	blood	boil
with	shame.	His	eyes	met	those	of	the	girl	and	he	found	himself	on	fire.	Suyodhana
parried	Balarama’s	next	hit	quickly	and	surprised	them	both.	Balarama	smiled	and
changed	tactics.	Suyodhana	fought	with	passion,	desperate	to	impress	the	girl.	It
took	almost	five	minutes	for	Balarama	to	pin	him	down	again	and	he	was	panting
with	 the	 exertion.	 Sweat	 glistened	 on	 his	 chiselled	 body	 as	 Suyodhana	 lay
squirming	under	his	powerful	foot.
“That	 was	 better	 Suyodhana,	 though	 I	 doubt	 it	 was	 your	 big	 dream	 that	 was
fuelling	your	passion.	Now	get	up	and	meet	Subhadra,	my	sister.	Subhadra,	this	is
Suyodhana,	 Crown	 Prince	 of	 Hastinapura.	 Please	 spare	 the	 poor	 Prince	 your
pranks.”	 Balarama	 lifted	 his	 foot	 and	 affectionately	 placed	 a	 huge	 hand	 on	 his
sister’s	beautiful	hair.
‘What	a	position	in	which	to	be	introduced	to	the	most	beautiful	girl	in	the	world,’
thought	Suyodhana	ruefully	as	he	rose	from	his	awkward	position,	trying	to	smile
and	look	presentable	in	his	loincloth.	He	felt	bashful	at	being	almost	naked	in	front
of	this	girl.	The	stupid	grins	of	his	brother	and	friend	did	not	help	matters	at	all.
Blood	had	clotted	on	his	shoulder.	He	wanted	to	touch	his	wound	but	wondered	if
she	 would	 consider	 it	 unmanly.	 He	 stood	 gaping	 at	 her	 sparkling	 eyes	 as	 she
moved	towards	him.
Subhadra	gently	touched	his	bloodied	shoulder	and	said,	“My	brother	is	a	brute.
See	what	you	have	done	to	the	poor	Prince.”

Suyodhana	blushed	to	the	roots	of	his	hair	and	felt	his	throat	go	dry.
“Suyodhana,	beware	of	her.	She	is	a	witch.	You	all	go	along	now.	I	have	important
matters	to	discuss	with	Bhishma.	At	the	same	time	tomorrow,	we	will	resume	our
practice.	 You	 two	 can	 join	 in	 if	 you	 want,”	 Balarama	 told	 Aswathama	 and
Sushasana,	 as	 he	 got	 dressed.	 Then	 he	 walked	 away,	 leaving	 the	 lovely	 young
woman	in	the	company	of	the	three	teenagers.
Suyodhana	 stood	 awkwardly,	 his	 natural	 shyness	 struggling	 with	 the	 pleasant
sensation	 in	 his	 heart.	 He	 did	 not	 know	 how	 to	 make	 small	 talk.	 Sushasana
grabbed	her	hand	and	said,	“Beautiful	bangles!”
“Don’t	touch	me!”	Subhadra	snapped.	But	Suyodhana	did	not	miss	the	smile	that
flashed	before	she	hid	it.
Sushasana	 was	 taken	 aback	 for	 a	 moment	 but	 recovered	 with	 his	 characteristic
resilience.	He	was	a	master	at	charming	girls	and	completely	unused	to	rejection.
Aswathama	 had	 taken	 up	 a	 bow	 and	 arrow	 and	 was	 aiming	 at	 a	 distant	 tree.
Suyodhana	knew	he	would	hit	the	target	with	perfect	marksmanship.	No	girl	could
remain	impervious	to	such	skill.	His	heart	sank.	He	was	no	match	for	his	rivals.
Hell!	He	had	met	her	a	few	minutes	ago	and	here	he	was	considering	his	brother
and	best	friend	his	rivals!
“If	Sushasana	and	Aswathama	will	excuse	us,	I	have	a	few	things	to	discuss	with
Prince	 Suyodhana,”	 Subhadra	 said	 coolly	 and	 grabbed	 Suyodhana’s	 hand	 and
started	walking	away.
Suyodhana	took	a	few	steps	with	her	in	a	daze	and	then	realised	he	was	still	in	his
loincloth.	He	stopped	in	embarrassment.	Subhadra	raised	her	pretty	eyebrows	in	a
question.	 Suyodhana	 looked	 longingly	 at	 his	 pile	 of	 clothes	 and	 she	 burst	 out
laughing.	Suyodhana	ran	quickly	to	get	his	clothes	but	Aswathama	and	Sushasana
looked	at	each	other	and	dived	for	the	pile	first.	But	Suyodhana	was	quicker	as	his
need	 was	 more	 desperate	 and	 he	 managed	 to	 get	 hold	 of	 his	 dhoti,	 though
Aswathama	got	his	shawl.
“Oh,	 leave	 them	 and	 come	 with	 me,”	 said	 Subhadra	 with	 a	 small	 shake	 of	 her
head,	completing	the	young	Prince’s	downfall.

Suyodhana	awkwardly	put	on	his	dhoti,	unsure	whether	to	face	her	while	he	was
regaining	his	modesty	or	turn	towards	his	grinning	friends.	Finally,	having	tightly
secured	his	 dhoti	so	 it	 would	 not	 slip	 off	 and	 embarrass	 him	 further,	 he	 looked
towards	 Subhadra.	 He	 heard	 a	 soft	 whistle	 from	 Aswathama	 while	 Sushasana
rolled	 his	 eyes.	 As	 he	 followed	 Subhadra	 like	 a	 man	 in	 a	 trance,	 he	 heard	 his
friend	 commenting	 to	 his	 brother,	 “Two	 minutes	 and	 he	 has	 forgotten	 his
companions.	He	sucks.”
“Fool!”	Sushasana	said	in	disgust.
Suyodhana	smiled	at	the	hint	of	jealousy	in	their	voices.	He	looked	at	Subhadra’s
beautiful	 face	 and	 his	 eyes	 involuntarily	 slipped	 to	 the	 shapely	 breasts	 that	 rose
like	lotuses	under	the	soft	silk	of	her	choli.	He	had	only	seen	such	beauty	as	the
curve	 of	 her	 flat,	 smooth	 stomach	 with	 its	 perfect	 navel	 in	 temple	 sculptures
before.	His	hungry	eyes	caressed	the	soft	curves	of	her	buttocks	and	the	long	legs
that	 ended	 in	 beautiful	 feet.	 The	 long	 fingers,	 which	 grabbed	 his	 wrist	 and	 the
smooth	shoulders	and	flowing	tresses,	drove	him	insane.	He	knew	not	where	to	let
his	eyes	linger	and	caress.	He	only	knew	he	was	incredibly	happy.	He	had	never
thought	first	love	could	be	so	sweet.

13	DHARMAVEERA
but	 that	 did	 not	 take	 anything	 away	 from	 the
bewitching	beauty	of	the	surroundings.	To	the	east,	majestic	blue	mountains	kissed
the	skies	and	verdant	valleys	slept	in	their	misty	quilt.	On	a	narrow	strip	of	land,
myriad	colours	bloomed,	as	if	nature	was	celebrating	her	fecundity.	Tall	coconut
palms	stood	like	sentinels	beside	the	winding	rivers	and	enchanting	backwaters.	A
deep-green	 sea	 caressed	 the	 sun-kissed	 beaches,	 while	 a	 gentle	 breeze	 played
hide-and-seek	in	the	cool	shade	of	gigantic	trees.	But	all	this	beauty	was	a	farce.
THE	 AIR	 WAS	 HOT	 AND	 HUMID	

The	 sprawling	 and	 ancient	 port	 city	 of	 Muzaris	 was	 in	 a	 festive	 mood.	 All	 the
great	Asura	Kings	who	ruled	lands	south	of	the	Vindhya	ranges	had	assembled	in
this	slowly	dying	city	for	a	great	event.	This	day	would	decide	who	would	win	the
coveted	title	of	Dharmaveera.	The	title	was	given	to	the	champion	of	martial	arts,
following	 a	 tough	 competition	 involving	 all	 branches	 of	 warfare.	Warriors	 from
the	Brahmin	and	Kshatriya	communities	assembled	every	six	years	at	the	majestic
arena	on	the	banks	of	the	river	Poorna,	to	decide	who	was	the	mightiest	warrior	in
their	 midst.	Though	 warriors	came	 to	 compete	 from	 every	 kingdom	 in	 India,	 the
disciples	of	Parashurama	took	the	title	every	time.
Parashurama	was	the	master	of	all	the	kingdoms	south	of	the	Vindhyas.	He	was	not
a	King,	but	a	kingmaker.	All	the	Asura	Kings	obeyed	his	decrees	in	religious	and
political	 matters.	 It	 would	 not	 have	 been	 wrong	 to	 say	 that	 his	 family	 was
responsible	 for	 all	 the	 misery	 around.	 Thousands	 of	 years	 ago,	 members	 of	 the
Parashurama	 family	 had	 brought	 the	 mighty	 Asura	 Empire	 to	 its	 knees.	 After	 the
fall	 of	 Mahabali	and	 Ravana,	 the	first	Parashurama	had	crushed	the	spirit	of	the
once-proud	 Asura	 race.	 Now	 the	 Asura	 Kings	 cowered	 before	 Bhargava
Parashurama	and	his	men.	Over	the	years,	the	Parashuramas	had	conducted	no	less
than	sixty-four	raids	into	kingdoms	across	India,	beheading	Kings	who	did	not	fall
in	 line.	 These	 bloody	 raids	 had	 resulted	 in	 the	 mass	 murder	 and	 annihilation	 of
many	races.	The	Devas,	Asuras,	Nagas,	Gandharvas	and	many	others,	had	faced
Parashurama’s	tyranny.	The	present	Parashurama	and	his	army	of	suppliant	Asura
Kings,	in	their	mission	to	impose	their	religion	throughout	India,	had	overthrown
even	Indra	of	the	Deva	clan.	The	last	Indra	was	a	weak	King	who	ruled	a	small

principality	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 upper	 Ganga.	 The	 victory	 had	been	 symbolic	 of
Brahmin	 might	 overcoming	 the	 Kshatriyas	 and	 other	 castes.	 Now	 everyone
cowered	 when	 Parashurama’s	 name	 was	 mentioned.	 What	 was	 important	 to
Bhargava	was	that	he	was	acknowledged	as	the	best	warrior	and	general	in	India.
However,	it	was	his	fate	to	be	the	first	of	his	clan	to	witness	the	loosening	of	the
caste	system	and	widespread	change.	He	was	proud	that	his	ancestors	had	brought
culture	and	religion	to	the	immoral	South	and	taught	them	the	value	of	chaturvarna
and	the	smritis.	However,	the	irony	was	that	as	the	South	fell	under	the	sway	of
Parashurama,	the	North	began	to	slip	from	his	hold.	He	was	intolerant	of	the	wave
of	reforms	sweeping	the	North.	He	hated	Bhishma,	who	had	once	been	his	friend
and	classmate.	He	resented	the	fact	that	Bhishma	had	rejected	the	doctrines	he	had
been	 taught	 as	 a	 student	 by	 the	 present	 Parashurama’s	 father.	 Bhishma	 had	 even
dared	to	make	the	low-caste	Vidhura,	Prime	Minister	of	Hastinapura.
Parashurama	kept	himself	informed	about	the	changes	taking	place	in	Hastinapura
and	these	caused	him	sleepless	nights.	He	had	sent	his	best	disciple,	Kripa,	to	gain
back	what	the	Brahmins	were	losing	because	of	the	reforms	but	Kripa	had	proved
to	be	a	traitor.	Parashurama	now	nursed	the	vague	hope	that	Drona	would	create
Kings	who	would	be	more	willing	to	listen	to	the	advice	of	the	Priests	and	show
respect	 for	 their	 religion.	 But	 he	 did	 not	 trust	 Drona	 completely.	 His	 spy,
Dhaumya,	sent	him	regular	reports	and	of	late,	these	had	been	worrying	him	more
and	 more.	 After	 Hastinapura,	 another	 northern	 kingdom	 was	 slipping	 from	 his
sphere	of	influence.	The	young	Yadava	leader,	Balarama,	was	turning	out	to	be	a
bigger	headache.	He	had	dared	to	defy	the	Priests’	decree	and	restarted	trading	by
sea.	 Dwaraka	 was	 fast	 replacing	 Muzaris	 as	 the	 major	 port	 of	 the	 sub-continent
and	Parashurama’s	war	machinery	was	being	weakened.
Parashurama	had	only	contempt	for	the	rebel	armies	of	Takshaka,	which	attracted
all	 the	low-castes	and	poor	who	 had	nothing	to	 lose.	He	 knew	they	 could	be	an
irritant,	 but	 a	 bunch	 of	 low-caste	 thugs	 were	 no	 match	 for	 the	 trained	 might	 of
either	Bhishma’s	Hastinapura	or	the	Southern	Confederate.
Though	 the	 Pandava	 brothers	 were	 turning	 out	 to	 be	 receptive	 to	 Brahminical
ideology,	 their	 claim	 to	 the	 throne	 of	 Hastinapura	 was	 weak.	 Crown	 Prince
Suyodhana	 showed	 every	 indication	 of	 becoming	 another	 Bhishma,	 but	 with
recklessness	 and	 rashness	 thrown	 in,	 making	 him	 more	 dangerous.	 Parashurama
privately	 lamented	 that	 the	 Gods	 were	 turning	 against	 him	 and	 that	 he	 would	 go

down	in	history	as	the	man	who	lost	everything	his	ancestors	had	fought	so	hard	to
build	over	generations.	It	would	be	tragic	to	have	to	surrender	his	beloved	lands
into	the	hands	of	reformers	like	Bhishma	and	Balarama.	It	did	not	help	that	he	did
not	 have	 children.	 There	 was	 no	 one	 to	 continue	 the	 lineage.	 Taking	 over
Hastinapura	before	all	was	lost	was	the	key	and	he	desperately	needed	a	gamechanger.
All	Parashurama’s	hopes	were	pinned	on	the	handsome	young	man	standing	before
him.	His	face	was	as	radiant	as	the	rising	sun.	Parashurama’s	eyes	scanned	the	fair
form,	broad	shoulders,	and	shining	earrings	and	chest	plate	he	wore.	The	teenager
looked	every	inch	a	warrior.	How	could	a	poor	Brahmin	boy	from	Hastinapura	be
so	 warrior-like?	 ‘Perhaps	 I	 looked	 like	 that	 in	 my	 youth,’	 Parashurama	 thought
with	a	private	smile.	He	had	trained	Kripa,	Drona,	and	many	other	warriors,	but
he	 had	 never	 seen	 one	 as	 talented	 and	 passionate	 as	 this	 young	 man.
Parashurama’s	 chest	 swelled	 with	 pride	 when	 he	 thought	 that	 only	 the	 Brahmins
could	have	produced	such	outstanding	men.	‘Those	reformist	idiots	should	see	this
specimen	of	manhood	standing	before	me,’	he	thought.	‘Never	again	will	they	say
caste	hierarchy	has	no	meaning.’
It	 was	 the	 culmination	 of	 the	 eight	 years	 of	 intense	 training	 Parashurama	 had
imparted	to	the	young	man.	He	still	remembered	the	day	his	guards	had	brought	the
youngster	 to	 the	 palace.	 They	 had	 found	 him	 wandering	 aimlessly	 near	 the
dockyard.	 Seeing	 that	 he	 was	 a	 Brahmin,	 they	 had	 brought	 him	 to	 Parashurama,
who	 had	 assumed	 from	 his	 accent	 that	 the	 boy	 had	 walked	 all	 the	 way	 from	 the
North.	The	boy	said	he	had	come	in	search	of	a	Guru	and	shown	him	a	letter	of
recommendation	from	Kripa.	Parashurama	had	frowned	in	distaste	when	he	heard
Kripa’s	 name,	 but	 he	 never	 rejected	 a	 Brahmin	 before	 a	 test.	 He	 had	 personally
questioned	the	boy	on	his	knowledge	of	the	Vedas,	mantras	and	smritis.	 He	had
been	impressed	by	the	depth	of	his	education.	The	boy	lacked	skill	in	arms	but	had
greater	 courage	 than	 he	 would	 have	 expected	 in	 a	 Brahmin.	 Parashurama	 had
decided	 to	 take	 a	 chance	 and	 allowed	 him	 to	 attend	 his	 training	 classes,	 which
included	 the	 ancient	 Asura	 martial	 art	 form	 of	 Kalari,	 along	 with	 the	 newer,
scientific	 developments	 in	 arms	 and	 techniques	 from	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 This
training	made	his	warriors	the	most	feared	and	formidable	in	the	sub-continent.
Parashurama	had	been	happy	with	his	new	find.	The	boy	had	surprised	him	from
the	 first.	 This	 Brahmin	 boy	 from	 Hastinapura	 could	 be	 the	 game-changer	 he	 had
been	looking	for.	He	would	train	him	to	support	the	Pandava	Princes	Drona	was

teaching.	Bhishma	was	getting	old	and	if	the	eldest	Pandava,	Yudhishtra,	could	be
made	King	of	Hastinapura	by	some	means,	and	this	boy	developed	as	his	aide,	he
Parashurama	could	once	again	regain	everything	he	had	lost	to	the	Grand	Regent.
Once	 again,	 people	 would	 return	 to	 their	 roots	 and	 religion	 and	 respect	 caste,
even	in	the	North.
“Vasusena,	my	son,	you	are	ready.”	Parashurama	beamed	at	Karna,	who	bowed	in
deep	respect,	touching	his	teacher’s	feet.	“Come,	let	us	go.”	Parashurama	put	his
hand	on	Karna’s	broad	shoulders	and	pressed	him	to	his	heart.	Then	they	walked
past	the	bowing	guards	to	the	deafening	cheers	of	the	frenzied	crowd.
Karna	blinked,	adjusting	his	vision	to	the	blinding	sunlight.	He	said	a	silent	prayer
to	Surya,	the	Sun	God,	touching	the	ground	with	his	forefingers	before	lifting	them
to	 his	 forehead	 and	 then	 bowing	 to	 the	 roaring	 crowd.	 Tier	 upon	 tier	 of	 people
cheered	from	the	stands	of	the	majestic	arena.	The	rhythmic	beating	of	the	chenda
drums	 added	 to	 the	 excitement.	 The	 flags	 of	 different	 kingdoms	 fluttered
everywhere.	It	was	the	day	the	young	warriors	from	Parashurama’s	training	school
would	graduate.	The	entire	populace	of	the	sprawling	city	of	Muzaris,	as	well	as
many	others	from	faraway	lands,	had	assembled	to	witness	the	spectacular	show.
An	excited	announcer	was	struggling	to	be	heard	above	the	incredible	din.	He	was
calling	out	the	names	of	the	Princes	and	Brahmin	warriors	who	were	going	to	be
part	 of	 the	 display	 of	 arms.	 Karna	 was	 thrilled	 by	 the	 thunderous	 applause	 that
shook	the	arena	when	his	name	was	called.	He	took	a	seat	with	a	clear	view	of	the
platform,	which	had	been	built	in	the	centre	of	the	huge	ground.	Soldiers	pranced
around	on	majestic	Arabian	horses,	shouting	orders.
Some	 of	 the	 Princes	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 and	 a	 few	 Brahmin	 warriors
dazzled	the	crowd	with	their	horsemanship.	The	horses	thundered	from	one	end	of
the	ground	to	the	other,	gracefully	jumping	obstacles.	Warriors	in	shining	armour
clashed	 with	 their	 swords	 or	 maces,	 with	 surprising	 speed	 and	 agility.	 One	 by
one,	the	Kings	of	the	various	southern	kingdoms	entered	the	arena	with	troops	of
musicians	and	drummers,	who	would	be	cheering	their	own	Princes.	There	were
many	proud	parents	among	the	assembled	Kings	and	Queens.
The	 reigning	 Chera	 King,	 who	 ruled	 Muzaris	 and	 the	 Western	 coast,	 fell	 at
Parashurama’s	feet,	asking	for	his	blessing.	The	 mighty	 Pandyas	of	Madurai,	the
majestic	 Pallavas	 of	 Kanchipuram,	 and	 other	 monarchs	 of	 the	 Confederate,

followed.	 The	 Asura	 Kings	 then	 took	 their	 seats,	 waiting	 expectantly	 for	 their
young	 Princes	 to	 demonstrate	 their	 prowess.	 Queens	 dressed	 in	 priceless	 pearls
and	 diamonds	 greeted	 each	 other	 with	 cold	 civility,	 secretly	 praying	 for	 the
success	of	their	own	sons.	At	the	end	of	the	show,	Parashurama	would	bestow	the
title	 of	 Dharmaveera	 –	 Protector	 of	 the	 Faith,	 Religion,	 Brahmins,	 Cows	 and
Dharma	–	on	the	best	warrior.	It	was	a	coveted	honour	and	the	warrior	who	won
would	become	one	of	the	acknowledged	leaders	of	the	Southern	Confederate.
Parashurama	made	a	short	speech	about	the	importance	of	following	tradition	and
religion.	 Then	 he	 blew	 his	 conch	 to	 mark	 the	 start	 of	 the	 proceedings.	 Karna
walked	 up	 to	 Parashurama,	 bending	 gracefully	 to	 touch	 his	 feet	 and	 receive	 his
blessing.	 Then	 he	 took	 up	 his	 arms,	 checking	 the	 arrows	 for	 sharpness	 before
placing	them	in	the	quiver;	testing	the	temper	of	his	bow	as	well	as	his	swords	and
daggers.	 Satisfied,	 he	 took	 the	 reins	 of	 his	 favourite	 horse	 from	 the	 waiting
attendant	 and	 leapt	 into	 the	 saddle	 with	 easy	 grace.	 Raising	 his	 sword	 to	 the
crowd,	who	thundered	its	applause,	he	swiftly	turned	to	gallop	towards	his	peers.
To	 his	 left	 was	 his	 strongest	 competitor	 and	 local	 favourite	 –	 the	 Chera	 Prince,
Uthayan.	To	his	right	was	the	Prince	of	Kalahasthi,	an	expert	with	the	mace.	Karna
could	 feel	 tension	 knot	 his	 stomach.	 The	 first	 competition	 was	 horseracing	 and
Karna	knew	the	Prince	of	Vatapi	would	be	the	toughest	to	beat.	He	also	feared	the
Brahmin	warrior	from	Kalinga,	who,	like	him,	had	travelled	a	long	way	for	this
knowledge.
Karna’s	reaction	to	the	call	of	the	whistle	was	a	little	slow.	The	Princes	on	his	left
and	 right	 had	 thundered	 away	 by	 the	 time	 his	 horse	 leapt	 forward.	 The	 warrior
from	Kalinga	was	leading	the	race,	with	the	Prince	of	Vatapi	trailing	him.	Blood
pounded	in	Karna’s	head	as	he	concentrated	every	nerve	and	sinew	to	reach	the
front.	 The	 Prince	 of	 Chera	 kept	 cutting	 in	 on	 him	 and	 blocking	 his	 path,	 and	 he
could	smell	the	sweat	of	the	Gokarna	Prince’s	horse	on	his	left.	With	just	one	lap
to	go,	Karna	was	in	fifth	position,	with	the	Chera	Prince	in	fourth.	The	Brahmin
warrior	from	Kalinga	had	established	a	comfortable	lead	by	the	last	round	while
the	 Princes	 of	 Vatapi,	 Gokarna,	 Chera,	 and	 Karna,	 vied	 for	 the	 next	 spot.
However,	the	Chera	Prince	was	more	interested	in	not	letting	Karna	win	than	in
trying	to	seal	his	position.	The	crowd	roiled	like	an	angry	sea,	rising	and	falling	in
waves.	Rashly,	Karna	pulled	at	the	reins	of	his	horse	as	they	reached	the	last	bend,
allowing	 the	 Prince	 of	 Vatapi	 to	 shoot	 forward.	 The	 Chera	 Prince	 veered	 to	 the
left,	thinking	it	was	Karna	who	was	trying	to	shoot	past.	Since	the	Vatapi	Prince

had	 not	 anticipated	 Uthayan’s	 move,	 he	 crashed	 into	 him	 and	 the	 two	 fell	 in	 a
tangle	of	horses	and	men.	Karna	jumped	over	the	pile-up	and	finished	just	behind
the	Prince	of	Gokarna.	Prince	Uthayan	glowered	at	him	with	deep	hatred.
There	were	many	other	contests	such	as	chariot	racing,	the	command	and	control
of	 elephants,	 wrestling,	 archery,	 hand-to-hand	 combat,	 dagger	 play,	 combat	 with
sticks	and	mace,	and	so	on,	providing	hours	of	entertainment	to	the	ecstatic	crowd.
There	were	many	individual	champions	in	various	categories	but	by	the	end	of	the
day,	 it	 was	 clear	 that	 the	 coveted	 title	 of	 Dharmaveera	 would	 go	 to	 either	 the
Chera	 Prince	 or	 the	 Brahmin	 boy	 from	 Hastinapura.	 By	 evening,	 it	 was	 a	 tie
between	the	two.	Karna	had	excelled	in	archery	but	lost	precious	points	in	chariot
racing.	He	ruefully	thought	that	his	most	pathetic	performance	had	been	in	his	own
caste’s	area	of	expertise.	The	Chera	Prince	had	excelled	in	swordplay,	exhibiting
impeccable	footwork	and	sleight	of	arm.	The	crowd	had	split	into	two	camps	and
fistfights	broke	out	between	the	supporters	of	Karna	and	those	of	Uthayan.
***

Outside	the	arena,	the	guards	stopped	a	tired	Brahmin	who	insisted	he	wanted	to
speak	to	Parashurama	himself.	They	looked	at	his	tattered	clothes	and	naked	feet;
decided	he	was	nobody,	and	asked	him	to	wait.	The	Brahmin	had	travelled	a	long
way.	If	the	news	he	was	carrying	from	Hastinapura	had	not	been	so	important,	he
might	 have	 slept	 for	 a	 couple	 of	 days	 in	 a	 wayside	 tavern.	 Dhaumya	 had
discovered	the	real	identity	of	Parashurama’s	favourite.	Hence,	the	information	the
Brahmin	was	carrying	from	Dhaumya,	was	explosive.
Without	 Parashurama’s	 knowledge,	 the	 Chera	 King	 had	 written	 to	 Dhaumya	 to
enquire	about	Karna’s	antecedents.	His	spies	had	informed	him	that	Karna	was	the
only	real	competition	to	his	son,	Uthayan,	for	the	title	of	Dharmaveera.	The	King
harboured	a	niggling	doubt	that	the	Brahmin	boy	from	Hastinapura	was	not	in	fact
a	 Brahmin.	 He	 was	 such	 a	 natural	 warrior;	 the	 King	 had	 taken	 him	 to	 be	 a
Kshatriya.	If	only	he	could	prove	it,	Parashurama	would	have	no	choice	other	than
to	 throw	 the	 imposter	 out.	 With	 any	 luck,	 the	 boy	 could	 be	 declared	 Bhishma’s
spy.	It	was	the	only	way	to	ensure	the	title	for	his	son.	However,	the	reply	to	his
enquiry	 had	 still	 not	 been	 received	 and	 the	 Chera	 King	 had	 no	 choice	 but	 to	 go
ahead	with	the	competition.
Had	the	guards	let	the	Brahmin	messenger	from	the	North	into	the	arena	to	meet

either	 the	 Chera	 King	 or	 Parashurama,	 things	 could	 have	 turned	 out	 differently.
However,	the	guards,	anxious	to	see	the	final	combat	between	the	Prince	and	the
Brahmin	 warrior	 from	 Hastinapura,	 did	 not	 have	 time	 to	 waste	 on	 such
unimportant	 men.	 They	 directed	 the	 Brahmin	 to	 the	 feeding	 house	 where	 the
government	 fed	 Brahmins	 free,	 thrice	 a	 day,	 and	 rushed	 back	 to	 watch	 the	 final
combat.	They	were	relieved	to	find	the	last	contest	would	not	be	archery,	as	they
had	feared,	but	swordsmanship.	They	knew	Karna	to	be	the	best	archer	around	but
the	local	Chera	Prince	was	a	master	of	the	sword.	The	guards	joined	the	section	of
the	 crowd	 who	 were	 cheering	 loudly	 for	 their	 Prince	 and	 jeering	 Karna.	 The
Brahmin	 crowd,	 however,	 was	 cheering	 for	 Karna,	 much	 to	 the	 irritation	 of	 the
Chera	 King.	 But	 he	 wisely	 held	his	peace.	 The	 King	 prayed	 that	 his	 messenger
would	arrive	and	confirm	Karna	was	a	Kshatriya,	and	Bhishma’s	spy.
The	 Master	 of	 Ceremonies	 led	 the	 two	 warriors	 onto	 the	 platform.	 Karna	 was
regretting	his	impulsive	decision	to	accept	the	challenge	of	the	Chera	Prince	for	a
final	 test	 of	 skill	 with	 swords.	 He	 knew	 he	 was	 good	 but	 not	 as	 good	 as	 his
opponent.	He	was	in	a	weak	position	now.	Also,	he	was	an	outsider	and	had	the
support	 of	 only	 the	 Brahmins.	 The	 local	 crowd	 cheered	 for	 their	 Prince.	 The
sword	in	his	hand	felt	like	it	weighed	a	ton	while	his	opponent	wielded	it	as	if	it
was	made	of	lightwood.	The	Master	brought	the	combatants	to	the	centre,	where
they	bowed,	locking	their	shields	and	swords	with	one	knee	touching	the	ground.
The	 gong	 sounded	 once	 and	 the	 crowd	 erupted	 into	 a	 pandemonium	 of	 whistles,
drumbeats	and	applause.	Both	warriors	jumped	away,	assessed	their	opponent	and
charged.	The	swords	clashed	and	the	iron	shields	clanged	with	brutal	swiftness.	It
was	 a	 fascinating	 spectacle	 as	 the	 two	 masters	 of	 swordplay	 clashed	 in	 a
whirlwind	of	thrusts,	cuts,	blocks,	dodges	and	footwork.	They	fought	like	fighting
cocks,	 rising	 six	 feet	 into	 the	 air	 and	 then	 falling	 to	 the	 ground,	 only	 to	 bounce
back	again.	The	frenzied	beat	of	the	drums	drove	the	crowd	crazy	with	excitement.
***

The	messenger	from	Dhaumya	sat	in	the	feeding	house,	eating	his	first	wholesome
meal	in	many	days.	He	heard	the	frenzied	roar	of	the	crowd	and	wondered	what
the	fuss	was	about.
***

As	 the	 fight	 with	 traditional	 swords	 proved	 inconclusive,	 it	 was	 decided	 to	 test

the	combatants’	skill	with	the	Asura	weapon,	urumi.	This	was	a	fearsome	sword
and	Karna	had	yet	to	master	it.	He	shuddered	at	the	smile	the	Chera	Prince	wore.
The	 urumi	 was	 twelve	 feet	 long	 –	 a	 thin,	 flat	 strip	 of	 metal	 that	 was	 worn	 by
seasoned	warriors	like	a	belt.	In	the	hands	of	a	skilled	warrior,	the	weapon	was
deadly.	 It	 swished	 through	 the	 air	 with	 a	 mind	 of	 its	 own	 and	 could	 wind	 itself
around	an	opponent’s	neck	or	arm	like	a	python.	A	deft	jerk	decapitated	the	head
or	 amputated	 the	 arm.	 It	 was	 a	 difficult	 sword	 to	 master	 and	 even	 more	 so	 to
defend	against	using	a	shield.
Karna	 took	 a	 deep	 breath	 as	 he	 was	 handed	 the	 sinuous	 sword.	 The	 routine	 of
bowing	 was	 completed	 quickly	as	 the	 crowd	 was	 getting	 impatient	 for	 a	 result.
Once	 again,	 the	 two	 warriors	 clashed,	 but	 this	 time	 it	 was	 more	 confusing	 and
frightening	 to	 watch.	 The	 flexible	 swords	 swished	 through	 the	 air	 like	 silver
vipers	and	locked	in	the	air,	searching	for	the	opponent’s	body.	The	urumis	looked
almost	alive	and	there	seemed	to	be	four	warriors	fighting	instead	of	two.	Twice,
Karna	narrowly	escaped	his	hand	being	sliced	off.	Once	he	nearly	got	the	Chera
Prince’s	 head.	 It	 was	 no	 longer	 a	 competition;	 it	 was	 deadly	 combat,	 with	 the
crowd	baying	for	blood.
In	 one	 of	 those	 quirks	 of	 destiny,	 Uthayan’s	 urumi	 became	 entangled	 in	 Karna’s
armour	 for	 a	 moment.	 The	 Chera	 Prince	 tried	 desperately	 to	 free	 his	 sword	 but
that	 second’s	 reprieve	 proved	 enough	 for	 Karna.	 He	 saw	 the	 fear	 in	 Uthayan’s
eyes.	 The	 Chera	 Prince	 had	 aimed	 at	 Karna’s	 neck,	 missed	 by	 a	 hair,	 and	 the
urumi	caught	in	Karna’s	armour	instead.	Then	a	calm	acceptance	of	his	fate	wiped
out	 the	 fear	 from	 Uthayan’s	 eyes.	 In	 a	 similar	 situation,	 he	 would	 not	 have
hesitated	to	cut	off	Karna’s	head.	He	waited	for	Karna’s	urumi	to	wind	around	his
neck	and	sever	it	in	an	instant.	A	deathly	hush	fell	on	the	crowd.	The	Chera	King
gazed	 at	 the	 scene	 in	 horror.	 Then	 Karna’s	 urumi	 swished	 through	 the	 air	 in	 a
crazy	arc	and	wound	itself	around	Uthayan’s	urumi,	not	his	body.	With	a	jerk,	the
deadly	weapon	was	prised	from	the	Chera	Prince’s	hand.
The	 match	 was	 over.	 Karna	 was	 the	 new	 Dharmaveera.	 The	 arena	 erupted	 in	 a
frenzy	 of	 blowing	 conch	 shells,	 rhythmic	 beatings	 of	 chendas	 and	 wild	 cheers.
Shame	 flooded	 the	 Chera	 Prince’s	 soul	 and	 he	 looked	 at	 the	 warrior	 from
Hastinapura	with	deep	hatred.	He	had	played	hard	and	lost.	Now	everyone	would
forget	him.	The	reward	for	failure	was	oblivion.	His	eyes	met	his	father’s	but	the
King	looked	away.	His	son	had	failed	him.	It	would	have	been	preferable	if	Karna
had	 killed	 Uthayan	 in	 combat.	 At	 least	 he	 would	 have	 died	 with	 his	 head	 held

high,	 not	 as	 someone	 who	 owed	 his	 life	 to	 a	 Brahmin’s	 generosity.	 One	 of	 his
ancestors	 had	 impaled	 himself	 after	 winning	 a	 war,	 because	 of	 a	 wound	 on	 his
back.	 Though	 he	 had	 led	 his	 troops	 to	 victory	 and	 fought	 well,	 the	 illustrious
Chera	ancestor	had	decided	that	his	honour	had	been	compromised	by	the	injury
on	his	back.	It	meant	he	had	shown	fear	and	turned	to	run	away	from	his	opponent.
Now	Uthayan	owed	his	life	to	an	insignificant	warrior	from	the	North.	Wearily	the
King	suppressed	his	thoughts.	Though	he	felt	sorry	for	his	son,	he	had	other	duties
to	 attend	 to.	 He	 was	 playing	 host	 to	 the	 grand	 event	 and	 could	 not	 be	 found
wanting	 in	 hospitality	 to	 his	 guests.	 Even	 an	 unintentional	 slight	 could	 lead	 to	 a
bloody	 war.	 The	 Asuras	 were	 a	 sensitive	 race	 who	 protected	 their	 honour	 from
real	or	perceived	slights	and	fought	like	fools	over	trivial	issues.
Parashurama	hugged	his	protégé	on	the	stage	and	led	the	cheers	of	Dharmaveera
Karna.	Thousands	of	voices	echoed	it	in	jubilation.	The	Brahmins	were	dancing
with	 joy.	 Here	 at	 last	 was	 a	 warrior	 to	 challenge	 the	 arrogance	 of	 the	 Asura
Princes.	After	Kripa	and	Drona,	who	had	won	the	coveted	title	years	ago,	no	other
Brahmin	warrior	had	come	close	to	winning.	It	was	a	day	for	celebration,	proving
that	Brahmins	excelled	not	only	in	learning	and	rituals	but	also	in	the	science	of
arms.	 They	 hugged	 each	 other	 in	 a	 delirium	 of	 joy,	 their	 chests	 swelling	 with
pride.
***

The	 Brahmin	 messenger	 from	 Hastinapura	 was	 desperate	 to	 get	 inside	 and	 meet
the	King	or	Parashurama	but	the	guards	refused	to	budge.	He	waited	outside	the
arena,	 determined	 to	 catch	 either	 as	 they	 emerged,	 not	 knowing	 that	 the	 nobles
would	be	taking	a	separate	route	to	the	palace.	The	gateway	he	stood	in	was	for
the	 common	 populace.	 The	 messenger	 thus	 waited	 for	 many	 hours	 and	 finally
decided	 to	 remind	 the	 guards	 about	 his	 permission	 to	 meet	 the	 ruler.	 They	 had
completely	 forgotten	 him.	 They	 advised	 him	 to	 go	 to	 the	 palace,	 so	 the	 Brahmin
walked	 on.	 Once	 again,	 he	 was	 denied	 permission	 to	 enter	 as	 the	 King	 was
holding	 a	 banquet.	 Instead,	 the	 messenger	 was	 taken	 to	 the	 royal	 guesthouse	 to
rest.	 All	 his	 protests	 were	 in	 vain.	 It	 would	 be	 the	 next	 morning	 before	 Prince
Uthayan	received	the	fateful	message.
***

The	 nobles	 and	 Kings	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 showered	 gifts	 on	 the	 new

Dharmaveera.	Slowly	the	arena	emptied.	Jubilant	Brahmins	carried	the	Guru	and
his	disciple	to	the	palace	where	the	King	was	holding	a	banquet	in	honour	of	the
new	Dharmaveera.	Karna	 spent	a	glorious	night	celebrating	with	 the	dignitaries
of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate.	 The	 Chera	 King	 was	 gracious	 enough	 to	 hide	 his
disappointment	at	his	son’s	failure	and	bestowed	gifts	and	titles	on	Karna.	Though
the	 silent	 Chera	 Prince	 excused	 himself	 from	 the	 banquet	 at	 midnight,	 the	 party
continued	into	the	early	hours	of	the	morning.	Karna	was	bone	weary	by	the	time
he	reached	his	Guru’s	residence,	but	willingly	obliged	when	the	Guru	expressed
his	desire	to	sleep	in	the	open	air	of	the	garden.	Parashurama	slept	with	his	head
resting	on	the	thighs	of	the	charioteer’s	son,	deeply	content	at	having	trained	the
best	Brahmin	warrior	in	the	world.
By	 the	 time	 the	 sun	 turned	 the	 tips	 of	 the	 palm	 fronds	 golden,	 Karna’s	 legs	 had
gone	numb.	But	he	would	not	have	dreamed	of	moving	and	disturbing	the	Guru’s
slumber.	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 serene	 face	 and	 wondered	 why	 this	 man	 carried	 so
much	hatred	for	non-Brahmins.	In	the	last	eight	years,	Karna	had	come	to	love	and
respect	Parashurama.	He	had	been	overwhelmed	by	the	affection	shown	to	him	by
the	old	man	and	come	to	know	him	as	a	kind-hearted	and	generous	person.	Once
he	 was	 sure	 the	 caste	 rules	 were	 being	 followed,	 Parashurama	 ensured	 that	 the
Kings	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 ruled	 justly.	 The	 man	 owned	 no	 personal
wealth	and	lived	like	a	hermit.	He	had	inherited	a	palace	but	he	offered	it	to	every
destitute	Brahmin	who	crossed	his	path,	while	he	himself	occupied	a	string	cot	in
a	 small	 room.	 The	 palace	 was	 filled	 with	 Brahmins	 from	 all	 across	 India,	 who
had	come	to	learn	from	him.
Compared	to	Hastinapura,	the	people	in	the	lands	that	had	accepted	Parashurama
as	Guru	were	far	more	disciplined.	The	public	utilities	of	these	kingdoms	worked
better	 and	 the	 level	 of	 corruption	 was	 low.	 While	 the	 low-castes	 were	 treated
worse	 than	 animals	 and	 lived	 inhuman	 lives,	 the	 administration	 ensured	 there
were	no	famines	and	no	one	died	of	hunger.	All	the	important	posts	were	reserved
for	 Brahmins	 but	 Parashurama	 ensured	 there	 was	 no	 nepotism	 or	 corruption.
Women	were	treated	like	slaves	but	the	streets	were	safe	for	them	even	at	night;
and	 the	 law	 and	 order	 machinery	 worked.	 It	 was	 a	 strange	 mix	 of	 ugly	 and
desirable.	The	initial	disgust	Karna	had	felt	when	he	had	landed	in	Muzaris	as	a
teenager,	 had	 given	 way	 to	 a	 grudging	 respect	 about	 many	 things	 and	 a	 sense	 of
despair	 over	 others.	 Parashurama	 himself	 remained	 an	 enigma.	 He	 was	 mean,
fanatical,	 conservative,	 bloodthirsty,	 dogmatic,	 generous,	 scholarly,	 brave,

skilled,	 kind-hearted,	 principled,	 dedicated,	 and	 determined	 –	 all	 in	 one.	 Even
after	eight	years	of	close	association,	Karna	was	sure	of	only	one	thing	about	the
man	–	that	the	fanatic	Brahmin	leader	loved	him	like	a	son.
Karna	looked	at	the	serene	face	of	his	Guru	and	sighed.	He	was	feeling	extremely
drowsy	from	the	exertions	of	the	previous	day’s	competition,	a	night	of	partying,
and	no	sleep.	The	exhilaration	of	winning	had	worn	off	and	dread	filled	his	heart
over	 the	 deception	 he	 had	 successfully	 carried	 out	 for	 eight	 years.	 Now	 that	 he
was	famous,	the	probability	of	his	cover	being	blown	was	high.	He	wanted	to	get
out	 of	 the	 Chera	 kingdom	 and	 the	 South	 before	 that	 happened.	 He	 did	 not	 know
how	his	Guru	would	react	to	the	truth.
The	 birds	 had	 started	 chirping	 in	 the	 trees	 and	 Karna	 wished	 his	 Guru	 would
awaken.	 An	 overwhelming	 desire	 to	 blurt	 out	 the	 truth	 possessed	 him.	 He	 could
not	 continue	 the	 deception	 with	 a	 man	 who	 had	 treated	 him	 like	 a	 son.	 No	 one,
other	than	his	parents,	had	shown	him	such	kindness.	Parashurama	had	been	like	a
father	 to	 him.	 ‘What	 if	 I	 told	 him	 the	 truth?’	 Karna	 debated.	 His	 Guru	 would
certainly	 be	 angry	 but	 surely,	 he	 would	 calm	 down	 again,	 Karna	 reassured
himself.	‘After	all,	Parashurama	loves	me	as	a	person,	not	for	being	a	Brahmin.
Will	my	being	a	Suta	alter	his	love	for	me?	How	can	I	hide	the	truth	now	that	I
have	decided	to	leave?’
Karna’s	mind	was	in	turmoil	and	he	did	not	notice	a	wasp	enter	the	folds	of	his
dhoti.	 He	 became	 aware	 of	 a	 tickling	 sensation	 on	 his	 thigh	 but	 ignored	 it,
immersed	in	his	worries.	When	he	realized	it	was	a	wasp,	he	tried	to	capture	it	in
his	hands.	Suddenly	pain	shot	through	his	thigh.	The	wasp	had	bitten	him.	Karna
gritted	his	teeth.	The	pain	spread	quickly,	becoming	acute.	A	low	moan	escaped
his	lips	but	he	covered	his	mouth	with	his	hands	and	bit	his	fingers	and	then	his
tongue	as	pain	wracked	his	body.	His	muscles	twitched	as	he	struggled	to	remain
still.	He	could	not	disturb	his	Guru’s	sleep.	His	fingers	buried	themselves	in	the
soil.	 Karna	 looked	 at	 the	 sun	 slowly	 rising	 over	 the	 distant	 Blue	 Mountains	 and
prayed	for	strength.	With	every	ounce	of	determination	he	could	muster,	the	son	of
the	charioteer	remained	still	so	his	Guru	could	sleep	on.	However,	his	tears	were
beyond	his	control.
Parashurama	 awoke	 when	 Karna’s	 tears	 of	 pain	 fell	 on	 his	 face.	 He	 sat	 up	 and
placed	his	palm	on	Karna’s	forehead	to	check	for	fever.	“What	has	happened,	my
son?”

Karna	put	a	hand	into	the	folds	of	his	dhoti	and	 grabbed	the	wasp.	He	pulled	it
out,	 crushing	 it	 between	 his	 fingers.	 Then	 he	 looked	 up	 at	 his	 Guru	 through	 his
tears.	 Somewhere	 in	 the	 depths	 of	 his	 mind,	 Karna	 had	 expected	 his	 Guru	 to
acknowledge	 his	 sacrifice,	 so	 he	 was	 shocked	 to	 see	 the	 expression	 on
Parashurama’s	face.
“Who	are	you?”	Parashurama’s	voice	had	a	dangerous	edge.
At	 that	 moment,	 Karna	 knew	 his	 deception	 had	 blown	 up	 in	 his	 face.	 “I...	 I...”
Karna	 stammered,	 not	 knowing	 how	 to	 tell	 the	 truth.	 Words	 failed	 him.	 The
enormity	of	his	deception	choked	his	throat.
“You	are	not	a	Brahmin.	I	am	sure	of	that.	No	Brahmin	could	withstand	so	much
pain.	You	 must	 be	 a	 Kshatriya...	 you	 scoundrel...	 you	 cunning	 rascal...	 you	 have
deceived	 me!	 You	 do	 not	 belong	 to	 our	 caste.	 You	 gained	 knowledge	 through
deception.	 You	 belong	 to	 the	 caste	 I	 am	 a	 sworn	 enemy	 of!	 Sixty-four	 times	 my
family	has	fought	the	Kshatriyas,	and	 now	 a	 Kshatriya	 dares	 to	 steal	 knowledge
from	me?”	Parashurama	thundered.
Karna	 fell	 at	 his	 Guru’s	 feet.	 “Swami…	 forgive	 me…	 forgive	 me…	 I	 am	 not	 a
Kshatriya…”	Karna	wept,	holding	onto	his	Guru’s	feet.
“Liar!	You	say	you	are	not	a	Kshatriya?	Who	else	could	bear	a	wasp’s	sting	for
hours	without	uttering	a	cry	of	pain…	a	Brahmin?	You	want	me	to	believe	that?
You	think	I	am	a	fool?	I	curse	you.”	Parashurama	kicked	away	Karna’s	hands.
Karna	remained	kneeling.	“Swami...	I	am	your	son...	do	not	curse	me…	I	am	not	a
Kshatriya...”
“Scoundrel!	You	pile	lie	upon	lie.	I	curse	you	–	you	will	forget	whatever	you	have
learnt	through	your	deception	and	 lies,	 at	 the	 most	 critical	 moment	 of	 your	 life.
The	knowledge	you	have	cheated	from	me	will	be	of	no	use	when	you	need	it	the
most.	Be	gone	from	my	sight.”	Parashurama	turned	away	in	abhorrence.
“Swami...	I	am	not	a	Kshatriya.	I	will	go,	but	I	have	served	you	like	a	son...	do	not
curse	me,	Swami.”
“He	 is	 telling	 the	 truth.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 Kshatriya.”	 Both	 Parashurama	 and	 Karna
turned	 their	 heads	 in	 surprise.	 The	 Chera	 King,	 Prince	 Uthayan,	 and	 a	 Brahmin,

stood	watching	them.	There	was	a	smile	of	derision	on	Uthayan’s	lips.
Karna	 closed	 his	 eyes	 in	 despair.	 He	 recognized	 the	 Brahmin	 as	 a	 Priest	 from
Hastinapura,	one	who	had	objected	to	Kripa	teaching	him	the	scriptures.	He	knew
what	 was	 coming.	 Death	 beckoned.	 He	 stood	 deep	 within	 the	 Southern
Confederate	 where	 caste	 ruled	 supreme	 and	 people	 died	 for	 religion.	 He	 had
made	a	fool	of	the	proud	Asura	Kings	by	becoming	the	Dharmaveera.	A	Shudra
Dharmaveera?	 All	 of	 India	 would	 be	 laughing	 at	 the	 Confederate	 and	 at
Parashurama,	when	the	news	leaked	out.
“I	know	a	Kshatriya	when	I	see	one,”	Parashurama	said.
The	 Chera	 King	 smiled	 smugly	 as	 the	 Brahmin	 messenger	 moved	 forward	 and
bowed	to	Parashurama.	“Sir,	I	am	from	Hastinapura.	I	know	this	young	man	from
his	boyhood.	I	have	come	to	convey	the	message	that	this	is	Vasusena	Karna,	son
of	Athiratha	and	Radha	of	Hastinapura.”	The	Brahmin	paused	for	effect	and	Karna
hung	his	head	in	shame,	fearing	the	next	words	the	Brahmin	would	utter.
Parashurama’s	face	flushed	in	anger.	“And	his	caste?”
The	Brahmin	looked	at	the	Chera	King,	who	nodded	impatiently.	“Swami,	he	is	a
Suta,	the	son	of	a	lowly	charioteer...	a	Shudra.”
Parashurama	 stood	 still.	 Then	 his	 eyes	 disappeared	 into	 their	 sockets	 as	 he	 fell
backwards	 onto	 the	 ground.	 They	 all	 rushed	 to	 tend	 the	 Guru.	 Karna	 knew	 he
would	be	hunted	down	like	a	wild	dog.	The	armies	of	the	conservative	Southern
Confederate	 were	 all	 in	 Muzaris.	 He	 could	 choose	 to	 die	 fighting	 but	 he	 was
young	 and	 Kripa’s	 initial	 training	 in	 common	 sense	 took	 hold.	 Karna	 ran	 for	 his
life.
With	 everyone’s	 attention	 on	 the	 prostrate	 Parashurama,	 no	 one	 saw	 Karna	 slip
away.	 By	 the	 time	 the	 Chera	 Prince	 noticed	 his	 absence,	 Karna	 had	 already
reached	 the	 docks.	 Uthayan	 shouted	 for	 his	guards,	 barking	 instructions	 to	 bring
the	fugitive	back	to	him,	dead	or	alive.	Karna	saw	soldiers	rushing	towards	him
from	 the	 palace.	 A	 ship	 was	 unfurling	 its	 sail	 in	 the	 harbour.	 The	 gangway	 was
being	 lifted	 as	 it	 started	 moving.	 Karna	 leapt	 across	 the	 widening	 gap,	 just
managing	to	scramble	aboard.

“Hey!	Who	the	devil	are	you?”	a	voice	cried	out.
Karna	saw	a	tall	barbarian	with	dirty	yellow	hair,	standing	at	the	bow	of	the	ship.
His	 skin	 was	 as	 pale	 as	 a	 ghost’s.	 ‘Mlecha,’	 thought	 Karna.	 From	 his	 accent,
Karna	 guessed	 the	 barbarian	 was	 from	 Yavana	 Desha.	 The	 big	 man	 looked	 at
Karna	 closely.	 ”Hey,	 aren’t	 you	 that	 champion	 from	 yesterday’s	 competition?
Dhama…	something...?”	he	asked	in	broken	Tamil.
“Sir…	where	is	this	ship	going?”	Karna	responded	in	fluent	Greek.
“You	speak	my	language?	Are	you	from	our	lands...	no....	You	are	too	dark	for	that.
I	 am	 the	 Captain	 of	 this	 ship.	 We	 are	 carrying	 pepper	 and	 spices.”	 The	 Captain
waved	away	the	sailors	who	had	appeared	to	confront	the	intruder.
Karna	 watched	 the	 Chera	 soldiers	 assembling	 on	 the	 beach	 and	 Prince	 Uthayan
positioning	 his	 archers.	 The	 ship	 was	 gaining	 speed	 in	 the	 steady	 wind.	 Karna
wondered	why	they	had	not	launched	any	boats	to	chase	him.	Onshore,	the	Asura
soldiers	were	confused.	The	young	Prince	wished	to	launch	the	hundred-foot-long
snake	boats	to	hunt	down	the	imposter.	The	snake	boats	were	swift	war	machines
with	a	hundred	men	rowing	each	one.	It	would	have	been	child’s	play	for	a	snake
boat	to	overtake	a	sluggish	ship,	but	Parashurama	had	decreed	the	sea	could	only
be	 crossed	 at	 the	 cost	 of	 losing	 caste.	 No	 one	 was	 willing	 to	 live	 the	 life	 of	 an
Untouchable	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 catching	 a	 Shudra.	 The	 only	 person	 who	 could	 give
them	 exemption	 was	 Parashurama	 himself	 and	 he	 lay	 in	 a	 coma.	 Frustrated,	 the
Prince	ordered	his	archers	to	shoot	at	the	foreign	ship.	Karna	watched	the	arrows
fall	well	behind	and	let	out	a	sigh	of	relief.
“What	the	hell!	Why	are	they	shooting	at	us?	Are	they	chasing	you?”	the	Captain
asked.
Karna	took	off	one	of	the	gold	chains	he	had	been	given	the	previous	day	and	he
put	it	into	the	Greek’s	hands.	“Sir...	I	am	from	Hastinapura,	and	I	am	of	low	caste.
Please	set	me	down	in	Prabhasa	or	Dwaraka,	and	I	will	find	my	way	back	to	my
native	city	from	there.	Please	help	me,	my	life	is	at	stake.”
The	Captain	looked	at	the	tall	young	man	in	confusion.	Yesterday	he	had	been	the
local	hero	and	now	the	same	people	were	shooting	at	him?	Finally,	he	said,	“I	can
drop	you	at	Dwaraka.	We	will	stop	there	to	pick	up	cotton.	Why	would	they	want

to	kill	you	of	all	people?	You	were	terrific	yesterday.	You	are	their	champion.”
“I	am	a	Shudra,	a	low-born,	and	I	am	not	supposed	to	learn	the	science	of	arms.
They	want	to	kill	me	for	the	crime	of	learning.”
“What!	Is	learning	a	crime	in	your	country?	You	people	are	so	uncivilized!
Young	man,	I	will	make	you	an	offer.	Come	to	my	country	and	show	half	the	talent
you	displayed	yesterday.	You	are	a	master	archer!	Come	with	me	and	see	how	you
will	be	honoured	for	your	skill.	You	can	even	become	Governor	of	a	province	if
you	show	talent.	Your	compatriots	want	to	kill	you.	Come	with	me	instead.”
Karna	looked	back	at	the	men	of	the	Southern	Confederate	baying	for	his	blood,
from	the	enchantingly	beautiful	shores	of	the	Chera	kingdom.	Blinded	by	rage	and
prejudice,	they	wanted	him	dead	for	having	learnt	a	skill,	for	showing	talent	and
beating	them	at	their	own	game,	merely	because	he	had	been	born	into	a	low	caste.
‘This	is	my	India,	my	land.	See	how	they	treat	a	poor	charioteer’s	son,	who	dared
to	dream,’	Karna	thought	bitterly,	his	eyes	blinded	by	tears.	He	may	have	escaped
the	fanatics	of	the	Confederate	for	now	but	what	awaited	him	at	home?	The	news
of	his	deception	would	soon	reach	there	and	people	would	make	fun	of	the	Suta
who	wanted	to	be	a	Kshatriya.	What	use	was	knowledge	and	skill	if	one	did	not
have	 the	 luck	 to	 be	 born	 to	 the	 right	 parents?	 It	 was	 doubtful	 whether	 he	 would
even	 be	 employed	 as	 a	 charioteer	 now.	 The	 future	 looked	 bleak.	 ‘My	 country
considers	me	an	outcast.	All	the	mighty	Kings	of	south	India	want	me	dead.’	And
now	a	foreigner,	whom	he	thought	of	as	an	uncultured	barbarian,	was	offering	him
greatness	on	a	platter.
The	Captain	saw	the	tears	in	the	young	warrior’s	eyes	and	gently	touched	Karna’s
forearm.	“Are	you	alright,	young	man?”
Karna	turned	towards	the	Greek.	“Thank	you	for	your	offer.	Sir,	this	is	my	country,
my	 culture,	 my	 religion.	 For	 every	 mad	 man	 like	 those	 on	 the	 beach,	 there	 are
many	 noble	 men	 in	 this	 holy	 land.	 Your	 offer	 is	 tempting	 and	 my	 country	 has
treated	millions	like	me	unfairly,	but	I	cannot	leave	her	for	anything	in	this	world.
Among	all	the	Kings	who	cannot	think	beyond	the	narrow	confines	of	caste,	there
have	to	be	some	who	recognize	talent,	do	not	bother	about	caste,	and	treat	people
as	human	beings.	If	not,	I	will	die	like	the	many	that	have	been	crushed	under	the
tyranny	of	a	cruel	system.	But	whatever	the	cost,	I	will	not	leave	India.	My	destiny

lies	here.”
Karna	looked	away	towards	the	shining	sun,	ashamed	of	the	tears	that	had	started
flowing	 down	 his	 handsome	 face.	 The	 Greek	 Captain	 shook	 his	 head	 and
wondered	 how	 such	 a	 backward	 country	 could	 produce	 young	 men	 such	 as	 this
one.	And	the	ship	sailed	its	course	towards	the	shining	new	city	of	hope,	which
Balarama	had	created	with	pain	and	dreams	–	Dwaraka.

14	GURUDAKSHINA
EKALAVYA	 SURVIVED	 THE	 FALL,	 though	it	took	him	two	long	months	to	heal.	After

his	fortuitous	escape	from	the	Naga	camp,	he	was	careful	not	to	stray	too	deep	into
the	forest	again.	Instead,	he	perched	in	a	tree	bordering	the	training	ground	of	the
Royals	and	from	this	vantage	point	watched	Guru	Drona	train	his	students.	Once
the	Guru	left	 with	 his	 disciples	 for	 the	 day,	 Ekalavya	 would	 descend	 and	 begin
practicing	what	he	had	seen.	Gradually	his	skills	improved	and	he	became	a	good
hunter.	Hunger	became	a	thing	of	the	past	for	his	aunt	and	the	children.
The	evening	he	took	a	deer	to	his	aunt,	they	had	spoken	of	many	things	while	the
meat	roasted	over	the	fire	under	a	star-sprinkled	sky.	His	cousins	were	growing
up	 and	 Ekalavya	 was	 happy	 teaching	 them	 some	 of	 the	 skills	 he	 had	 acquired.
They	talked	of	the	lost	boy,	Jara,	and	wondered	where	the	idiot	could	have	gone.
Ekalavya	had	already	decided	to	search	for	Jara	and	bring	him	back	to	the	family.
They	were	still	poor,	but	now	they	could	afford	to	feed	one	more.	Ekalavya’s	full
stomach	prompted	him	to	be	generous.
With	single-minded	dedication,	the	Nishada	acquired	skills	to	rival	any	archer’s
in	the	country.	He	heard	rumours	about	the	upcoming	passing-out-day	competition
for	the	Princes	and	desperately	wished	he	could	participate.	He	burned	to	pit	his
skills	 against	 Arjuna.	 Perhaps	 he	 could	 surprise	 Drona	 by	 beating	 Arjuna	 at	 his
own	game.	The	Nishada	boy	dreamt	of	the	day	the	Guru	would	embrace	him	and
say	he	had	made	a	mistake	in	not	recognizing	his	talent	earlier.
Ekalavya	 made	 a	 statue	 of	 Drona	 in	 clay	 and	 placed	 it	 in	 a	 small	 clearing.	 He
began	each	day	by	doing	obeisance	to	the	statue	and	then	practicing	for	three	hours
before	 going	 to	 watch	 the	 training	 at	 the	 grounds.	 In	 Ekalavya’s	 mind,	 Drona
became	the	father	he	had	never	known.	Though	he	resented	the	way	the	Guru	had
treated	 him,	 his	 admiration	 for	 the	 great	 warrior	 bordered	 on	 devotion.	 He	 was
jealous	 of	 Arjuna,	 who	 seemed	 to	 have	 cornered	 all	 his	 hero’s	 love.	 Drona
fawned	 on	 the	 middle	 Pandava.	 The	 only	 other	 person	 he	 seemed	 to	 care	 about
was	his	own	son,	Aswathama.	However,	of	the	two,	it	was	evident	Arjuna	was	his
favourite.	 Ekalavya	 saw	 that	 Aswathama	 lacked	 Arjuna’s	 confidence	 and

arrogance	 and	 his	 father	 often	 belittled	 him,	 making	 unfavourable	 comparisons
when	 he	 competed	 against	 Arjuna.	 Aswathama	 craved	 his	 father’s	 praise,	 but	 it
was	given	sparingly.
Ekalavya	 accidentally	 came	 upon	 Prince	 Suyodhana	 early	 one	 morning.	 He	 had
arrived	at	the	training	ground	in	hopes	of	collecting	any	abandoned	arrows,	which
he	could	then	use	for	his	own	practice.	He	was	surprised	to	find	a	tall,	muscular
man	 and	 a	 beautiful	 girl	 already	 there,	 chatting	 with	 the	 Prince	 and	 his	 two
companions.	They	had	arrived	even	before	him	and	been	practicing	with	the	mace.
Curious,	Ekalavya	began	arriving	at	the	ground	earlier	and	earlier.	For	almost	a
month,	the	tall	man	came	to	coach	Suyodhana,	Sushasana	and	Aswathama,	in	the
use	 of	 arms.	 The	 young	 girl	 who	 accompanied	 him	 was	 a	 treat	 for	 the	 eyes.
Ekalavya’s	heart	beat	hurriedly	whenever	she	turned	her	head	to	look	towards	the
jungle.	He	learned	the	man	was	Balarama,	leader	of	the	Yadavas	of	Dwaraka,	and
the	girl	was	his	sister,	Subhadra.
Ekalavya	saw	a	change	in	Suyodhana	and	his	companions.	Imperceptible	at	first,	it
was	visible	to	all	by	the	end	of	the	month.	The	Crown	Prince	began	holding	his
own	against	Bhima	in	class,	as	did	Sushasana	and	Aswathama.	It	was	as	if	they
had	 found	 a	 well	 of	 strength	 and	 courage	 deep	 within	 themselves	 and	 were
drawing	from	it	at	will.	To	the	Guru’s	surprise,	the	tide	began	turning	slowly	but
surely.	When	Suyodhana	first	beat	Bhima,	Ekalavya	wanted	to	 whistle	in	delight
from	 his	 hiding	 place.	 He	 felt	 inspired	 by	 what	 Suyodhana	 had	 achieved.	 The
Prince	 was	 half	 Bhima’s	 size	 but	 it	 was	 a	 treat	 to	 watch	 him	 take	 on	 the	 mighty
Pandava	with	the	mace.	Suyodhana	was	all	grace	and	quickness	whereas	Bhima
was	 brute	 strength	 and	 power.	 Bhima	 attacked	 like	 a	 charging	 elephant	 while
Suyodhana	had	the	grace	of	a	tiger.	Suyodhana	began	winning	the	bouts,	much	to
the	chagrin	of	the	Pandavas.	Life	would	never	be	the	same	for	them	again.
The	day	Prince	Suyodhana	beat	Bhima	for	the	first	time,	always	remained	clear	in
Ekalavya’s	memory.	Almost	a	month	had	passed	and	preparations	were	on	for	the
departure	of	the	Yadava	leader.	Ekalavya	saw	Suyodhana	with	Subhadra,	deep	in
the	jungle,	their	legs	immersed	in	the	coolness	of	a	mountain	stream,	chatting	about
sweet	 nothings.	 Ekalavya	 burned	 with	 jealousy	 and	 desire	 but	 followed	 the	 pair
discreetly.	He	knew	how	to	make	himself	invisible	in	the	foliage	of	the	forest.	He
gazed	at	Subhadra	and	sighed.	Such	beauty	was	beyond	his	reach.	He	was	merely
a	Nishada.	She	and	the	Prince	belonged	to	a	different	world.	Would	he	ever	have
a	girl	like	that	to	hold	in	his	arms?	He	looked	down	at	his	dark	body	and	then	at

Subhadra’s	fair	face.	It	was	never	going	to	happen.
Suddenly,	the	Prince	freed	himself	and	stood	up.	“I’m	sorry,	my	love.	What	we	are
doing	 is	 not	 right.	 I	 cannot	 betray	 my	 Guru,	 Balarama.”	 Pain	 and	 frustration
throbbed	in	Suyodhana’s	deep	voice.
“What	has	my	brother	to	do	with	it?”
“Subhadra,	I	want	to	 marry	you.	The	honourable	 thing	is	to	ask	your	brother	for
your	hand.	May	I	do	so,	my	dear?”
Subhadra’s	 face	 flushed	 delicately	 as	 her	 anger	 vanished.	 She	 looked	 up	 at	 the
Prince,	her	eyes	shining	like	stars,	and	hugged	him	tight.	He	kissed	her	tenderly	on
the	lips.
Hiding	in	the	bush,	Ekalavya	felt	ashamed.	He	had	heard	about	Kings	and	Princes
snatching	 girls	 from	 the	 street	 to	 quench	 their	 lust.	 But	 here	 was	 a	 Prince	 who
wished	to	protect	his	beloved’s	honour,	even	when	she	was	willing	to	give	in.
Subhadra	pushed	the	Prince	away.	“Suyodhana,	I	don’t	know	why	I	feel	so	afraid.
Perhaps	I	am	afraid	of	my	own	happiness.	I	am	so	happy	that	I	fear	nothing	will
come	of	our	love.	I’m	afraid	of	my	brother…”
“Why,	Subhadra?	I	do	not	think	Balarama	would	be	against	this.”
“No,	no…	I’m	not	talking	about	him	but	my	brother	Krishna.	He	hates	you.”
“He	hates	me!	I	have	not	even	seen	him.	What	have	I	done	to	earn	his	hatred,	other
than	loving	his	beautiful	sister?”	A	smile	moulded	Suyodhana’s	fine	mouth.
“I	do	not	know.	But	I	have	this	fear	always.	He	says	you	are	the	Evil	One	who	has
been	born	to	destroy	our	country	and	religion.	He	has	a	bunch	of	Priests	and	holy
men	around	him	who	have	only	bad	things	to	say	about	you.”
“About	 how	 evil	 I	 am?	 Look	 carefully,	 Subhadra;	 can	 you	 see	 horns	 sprouting
from	my	head?”	Suyodhana	burst	out	laughing.
“Do	not	laugh,	Prince.	You	do	not	know	the	reputation	you	are	earning	in	certain
circles.	 I	 myself	 came	 here	 to	 see	 the	 evil	 Prince	 of	 the	 stories	 I	 had	 heard	 –	 a

criminal	 who	 nearly	 murdered	 his	 cousin	 by	 poisoning	 him	 and	 got	 away	 on	 a
technicality,	 an	 arrogant	 man	 who	 cares	 nothing	 for	 the	 Holy	 Scriptures	 and
disrespects	Brahmins.	Suyodhana,	it	goes	on	and	on.	Frankly,	I	was	fascinated	by
such	a	man	and	was	already	half	in	love	with	you	before	we	even	met.	I	had	this
fantasy	of	loving	and	reforming	you.	I	was	rather	disappointed	you	were	not	the
devil	you	are	made	out	to	be.	But	you	are	a	fool	–	that	is	what	you	are.	You	are	too
idealistic	to	live	in	this	world.	You	wear	your	heart	on	your	sleeve.	Why	do	you
break	 the	 taboos	 and	 rules	 the	 learned	 men	 have	 prescribed,	 Suyodhana?”
Subhadra	looked	at	him,	love	and	fear	fighting	for	dominance	in	her	face.
“I	do	not	know,	Subhadra.	I	am	a	fool.	You	are	right	about	that.	I	do	not	fight	with
people	because	I	am	arrogant	and	think	I	know	better.	I	fight	with	some	of	them
because	I	do	not	find	anything	honourable	in	them.	I	have	never	fought	with	Kripa,
Bhishma,	 Vyasa	 or	 Vidhura;	 though	 it	 is	 true	 I	 cannot	 stand	 Dhaumya	 or	 his
cronies.”
“I	am	afraid	of	Krishna’s	reaction	to	our	relationship.”	Suyodhana	did	not	answer
but	smiled	down	at	her.
Ekalavya	 became	 alert	 as	 he	 heard	 someone	 coming	 towards	 the	 small	 clearing
near	the	stream.	He	saw	Balarama	approaching,	with	Aswathama	and	Sushasana
following.	 As	 they	 entered	 the	 clearing,	 the	 teenagers	 could	 not	 suppress	 their
chuckles.	Subhadra	gave	a	startled	cry.	It	was	only	then	that	Suyodhana	saw	them.
Deeply	 embarrassed,	 he	 struggled	 for	 words	 as	 Balarama	 stood	 with	 his	 hands
crossed	over	his	chest.
Suyodhana	 looked	 at	 his	 chuckling	 friends	 helplessly.	 “I…	 I	 am	 sorry…”
Balarama	stood	staring	at	him.	“I	wish	to	marry	your	sister…”
“You	are	sorry	you	wish	to	marry	my	sister?”	Balarama	asked	with	a	straight	face
and	everyone	burst	out	laughing.	“We	are	leaving	for	Kashi	today,	Suyodhana.	We
will	be	back	in	Dwaraka	after	the	monsoon.	Come	with	your	elders	to	 Dwaraka
then	and	we	will	formalize	the	engagement.”
Suyodhana	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 ears	 and	 looked	 around	 at	 the	 happy	 faces	 in
ecstasy.	For	a	bold	girl,	the	shyness	Subhadra	now	exhibited	was	rather	unsettling.
He	wanted	to	grab	her	and	shower	her	with	kisses.	For	a	moment,	he	wished	the
others	would	vanish	and	leave	them	alone	to	celebrate	their	love.

“For	 now,	 concentrate	 on	 your	 studies,	 Suyodhana.	 Graduation	 is	 only	 a	 few
months	 away	 and	 I	 do	 not	 want	 you	 to	 make	 a	 fool	 of	 yourself	 in	 front	 of	 the
people	 of	 Hastinapura.	 I	 am	 taking	 your	 fiancée	 with	 me	 on	 my	 pilgrimage	 to
Kashi,	 so	 you	 will	 not	 have	 any	 distractions.	 Subhadra,	 take	 your	 leave	 of
Suyodhana.	We	will	depart	this	afternoon,”	Balarama	told	the	young	couple.
There	 was	 little	 time	 for	 a	 farewell.	 She	 looked	 up	 at	 him	 with	 tear-filled	 eyes
and	Suyodhana	melted.	He	willed	his	own	tears	away,	for	it	was	unmanly	to	cry.
He	 had	 a	 hundred	 things	 he	 wished	 to	 say	 to	 her	 but	 no	 words	 rose	 to	 his	 lips.
Abruptly,	 Subhadra	 withdrew	 her	 hands	 from	 his	 and	 walked	 away.	 Suyodhana
watched	the	brother	and	sister	walking	towards	the	palace	with	a	sinking	heart.
“Enough,	lover	boy!	We	have	to	practice.”	Aswathama’s	voice	brought	Suyodhana
down	to	earth	with	a	thud.
“Was	it	you	who	brought	Balarama	here?”	Suyodhana	wanted	to	bang	his	friends’
heads	together.
“It	 was	 this	 stupid	 Brahmin’s	 idea,	 yes,”	 Sushasana	 said	 laughing,	 while
Aswathama	grinned	sheepishly.
“You	 fool!	 You	 could	 have	 caught	 us…”	 Suyodhana	 stopped	 mid-sentence,
realising	he	had	said	too	much.
“Caught	you	in	what…?”	asked	Aswathama,	winking	at	Sushasana.
“Reading	the	Shiva	Purana,	obviously,”	replied	Sushasana.	Both	youngsters	burst
into	uproarious	laughter.	Suyodhana	could	not	help	grinning.
“You	 clown!	 If	 I	 had	 not	 brought	 Balarama	 here,	 they	 would	 have	 left	 and	 you
would	be	roaming	about	singing	sad	songs	in	your	croaking	voice,	yearning	for	her
while	she	was	being	married	off	to	some	other	Prince.	I	deserve	a	treat.	However,
I	am	not	so	arrogant	that	I	will	deny	you	my	blessings.	I	will	not	even	mind	if	you
fall	at	my	feet	to	express	your	deeply-felt	gratitude,”	Aswathama	said	nobly.
Suyodhana	 lunged	 at	 him	 to	 land	 a	 punch	 on	 his	 mocking	 face.	 Soon	 the	 three
friends	 were	 laughing,	 singing,	 dancing	 about	 and	 making	 thorough	 fools	 of
themselves.	The	jungle	echoed	with	their	merriment	for	a	long	time	after	they	left.
Ekalavya	came	down	to	the	clearing.	He	could	discern	Subhadra’s	perfume,	which

still	lingered	in	the	air.	He	could	not	stand	so	much	happiness.	His	heart	went	out
to	 the	 kind	 Prince.	 He	 hoped	 that	 Suyodhana	 would	 find	 happiness	 with	 his
Yadava	Princess.	But	Ekalavya	was	a	Nishada	and	he	had	seen	life	in	all	its	heart
breaking	glory	at	much	closer	range	than	the	Prince.	Suyodhana	was	a	good	man
and	Ekalavya	was	happy	for	him.	But	he	knew	such	joy	and	real	life	rarely	went
together.	No	self-respecting	God	would	allow	a	good	man	to	be	happy	for	long.
God	has	relevance	only	in	the	unhappiness	of	good	people.
Ekalavya	 forgot	 the	 Prince’s	 love	 life	 as	 another	 thought	 gripped	 him.	 Balarama
had	 mentioned	 Graduation.	 Ekalavya	 passionately	 wanted	 to	 participate	 in	 the
event.	Perhaps,	if	he	impressed	Drona	with	his	prowess,	life	might	take	a	better
turn.	 He	 knew	 it	 was	 an	 impossible	 wish.	 He	 would	 not	 be	 allowed	 anywhere
near	the	arena,	except	in	the	stands	as	a	spectator.	Yet,	there	was	nothing	wrong	in
dreaming.
“Gods	of	the	forest!	One	chance	is	all	I	ask,”	he	shouted.	His	wish	echoed	around
him.	He	shouted	out	the	words	again.	And	again,	the	forest	replied.	When	he	grew
tired	of	the	game,	he	lay	down	on	the	grass	and	watched	the	soft	clouds	racing	in
the	 sky.	 ‘My	 day	 will	 come,’	 he	 kept	 reminding	 himself,	 as	 the	 breeze	 gently
flowed	over	his	wiry	frame.	He	could	almost	hear	the	roar	of	the	crowd	and	the
applause.	 He	 could	 see	 himself	 bowing	 modestly	 before	 the	 King.	 He	 could
imagine	his	Guru’s	face	glowing	with	pleasure.	As	the	day	wore	on,	the	Nishada’s
dreams	 became	 more	 colourful	 and	 the	 applause	 more	 thunderous.	 When	 the
shadows	 of	 trees	 became	 giants	 and	 started	 marching	 towards	 the	 east,	 he	 was
still	lying	on	the	grass	staring	at	the	sky.	He	did	not	know	that	life	would	give	him
not	only	a	chance,	but	also	a	choice,	all	too	soon.
Ekalavya	 woke	 to	 a	 glorious	 day.	 He	 felt	 one	 with	 nature,	 alive	 and	 fresh.	 The
forest	 caressed	 him	 with	 its	 hues	 of	 green	 and	 soothed	 his	 ears	 with	 birdsong.
Something	in	his	mind	told	him	it	was	going	to	be	an	important	day	in	his	life.	He
jumped	into	the	cool	waters	of	a	mountain	stream	and	swam.	He	sang	his	heart	out
and	 teased	 a	 cuckoo	 –	 imitating	 and	 confusing	 it.	 He	 finished	 his	 prayers	 to	 his
Guru	and	took	up	his	bow	and	quiver	of	arrows.
Ekalavya	saw	the	Princes	assembling	at	the	training	ground	and	took	up	his	usual
position	behind	the	thick	foliage,	to	watch.	They	were	busy	practicing.	Their	skills
had	improved	considerably.	Drona	was	walking	between	the	youngsters,	barking
instructions,	 correcting	 the	 grip	 of	 one	 Prince	 and	 shouting	 at	 another	 for	 not

keeping	his	eyes	on	the	target.	By	afternoon,	the	group	had	split	into	many	islands
to	have	lunch.	Ekalavya	saw	four	of	the	Pandavas	grouped	together	in	one	corner
while	Suyodhana	and	his	friends	wandered	away	towards	the	palace.	It	was	siesta
time	for	the	Guru.	They	would	reassemble	in	a	couple	of	hours.
Ekalavya	 continued	 to	 watch	 Arjuna	 with	 envy	 and	 amazement.	 The	 Pandava
Prince	was	not	resting	like	the	others.	He	kept	practicing	and	shooting	his	arrows
with	dexterity.	‘I	need	a	chance,	just	one	chance,	to	prove	I	can	beat	him,’	thought
Ekalavya,	his	heart	heavy	in	his	chest.	He	looked	wistfully	at	his	own	bow,	made
of	bamboo,	and	his	arrows	of	cane.	He	did	not	know	that	his	deepest	desire	was
about	to	come	true	–	with	disastrous	consequences.
A	mangy	puppy	entered	the	far	end	of	the	ground	from	the	direction	of	the	city.	It
was	on	its	daily	foraging	trip.	From	its	protruding	ribcage	and	spindly	legs,	it	was
apparent	that	the	dog	had	little	luck	 with	 its	 scavenging.	 The	 black	 puppy,	 with
sores	 showing	 through	 its	 sparse	 hair,	 was	 an	 affront	 to	 the	 eyes.	 It	 was	 also	 a
brave	answer	to	the	challenges	of	life.	The	only	thing	that	stood	between	death	and
the	 little	 dog	 was	 its	 sheer	 determination	 to	 survive.	 But	 this	 was	 soon	 to	 be
challenged.	The	dog	looked	suspiciously	at	the	group	of	young	men	and	paused	for
a	second,	its	ears	twitching	as	its	canine	instincts	screamed	to	it	to	go	back	into
the	safety	of	the	jungle.	But	hunger	won	out.	The	dog	took	a	tentative	step	forward
and	waited	for	a	chance	to	dash	through	the	group.
Arjuna	 saw	 the	 puppy	 and	 drew	 his	 bow,	 aiming	 at	 its	 right	 eye.	 Ekalavya
watched	anxiously.	The	puppy	was	quite	far	away	and	he	was	sure	Arjuna	would
miss.	But	he	was	wrong.	Despite	the	distance,	the	arrow	pierced	the	puppy’s	right
eye	with	accuracy.	For	a	second	there	was	utter	silence.	Then	the	puppy	broke	into
agonized	yelps,	blood	spurting	from	its	blinded	right	eye	as	it	twitched	and	rolled
on	 the	 ground	 in	 pain.	 Every	 head	 turned	 to	 look	 at	 what	 was	 happening.	 In	 the
distance,	Suyodhana	and	his	friends	looked	back	in	confusion.	The	Crown	Prince
realised	something	was	wrong	and	the	gang	began	walking	back.
Ekalavya	could	not	hide	his	admiration.	It	was	a	perfect	shot,	bang	on	target.	The
Pandava	Princes	gathered	to	congratulate	Arjuna,	who	stood	smiling.	A	beaming
Drona	 looked	 at	 his	 protégée,	 pride	 swelling	 his	 chest.	 Ekalavya	 saw	 the
happiness	on	the	Guru’s	face	and	impulsively	decided	his	time	had	come.	He	had
waited	so	long.	Arjuna	had	shot	the	puppy	from	almost	seventy	feet,	with	perfect
aim.	If	he	was	to	impress	these	nobles,	Ekalavya	would	have	to	do	better	than	that.

He	was	hidden	almost	a	hundred	feet	away	and	the	puppy	was	no	longer	standing
still,	 as	 it	 had	 done	 for	 Arjuna.	 In	 agony,	 it	 was	 rolling	 about	 and	 running	 from
side	 to	 side,	 then	 falling	 onto	 its	 back	 again,	 trying	 desperately	 to	 dislodge	 the
arrow.
Ekalavya’s	hands	trembled	with	tension	as	he	drew	his	crude	bow	and	took	aim.
He	uttered	a	silent	prayer	and	regained	his	concentration.	Then,	with	perfect	aim,
the	 Nishada	 shot	 the	 struggling	 puppy.	 The	 arrow	 swished	 past	 the	 Pandava
Princes,	 missing	 Arjuna’s	 neck	 by	 inches,	 and	 found	 its	 aim	 with	 a	 sickening
sound,	in	the	left	eye	of	the	puppy.	Time	stood	still	as	the	dark	Nishada	emerged
from	 hiding.	 Every	 eye	 turned	 to	 him.	 The	 puppy	 lay	 still	 in	 a	 pool	 of	 blood.
Ekalavya	 bowed	 to	 Drona,	 waiting	 for	 the	 congratulatory	 words	 he	 was	 sure
would	follow.	He	waited	for	his	Guru’s	embrace	and	tears	of	joy;	his	confession
that	 it	 had	 been	 an	 error	 of	 judgement	 to	 deny	 him	 the	 training	 he	 had	 sought,
because	of	his	caste.	He	waited	for	all	the	Princes	to	applaud,	for	the	great	Arjuna
himself	 to	 touch	 him	 and	 accept	 him	 as	 his	 equal	 and	 friend.	 He	 would	 forgive
them	 all	 magnanimously	 and	 join	 the	 Hastinapura	 army	 as	 the	 first	 Nishada	 to
break	 the	 caste	 rules,	 thought	 Ekalavya	 exultantly.	 A	 bright	 future	 and	 glorious
career	awaited	him,	its	doors	wide	open	and	beckoning.
“Guru,	this	Nishada	has	insulted	me,”	Arjuna	shouted.
Ekalavya	 raised	 his	 bowed	 head	 in	 shock	 and	 surprise.	 Drona	 stood	 silent,
immersed	 in	 his	 own	 thoughts.	 He	 saw	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 son	 were	 tending	 the
injured	 puppy.	 Surprisingly,	 it	 was	 not	 dead	 and	 stirred	 when	 the	 Crown	 Prince
touched	 it.	 Aswathama	 was	 trying	 to	 hold	 it	 still.	 ‘Fool!’	 thought	 Drona.	 ‘When
will	 he	 understand	 that	 it	 is	 impure	 to	 touch	 such	 dirty	 creatures	 as	 dogs?	 As	 a
Brahmin,	he	must	keep	away	from	them.’
“Guru…	Guru…	witness	this	injustice!”
Arjuna’s	cries	brought	him	back	to	the	problem	at	hand.	As	a	warrior	and	teacher,
the	 Nishada’s	 skill	 had	 impressed	 Drona.	 He	 wondered	 how	 the	 Nishada	 could
possibly	have	learnt	to	shoot	that	well.	Who	could	be	his	Guru?
“Who	 is	 your	 Guru,	 son?”	 Drona	 could	 not	 conceal	 his	 admiration	 though	 he
wished	to	sound	stern.

Arjuna	noticed	it	too	and	pressed	his	lips	tightly	together	in	anger.	“You	are	my
Guru.	I	owe	everything	I	have	learned	to	you,”	Ekalavya	said.
“Guru…	 he	 lies,”	 Arjuna	 shouted.	 “It	 is	 unfair.	 You	 have	 cheated	 us.	 You
promised	 my	 mother	 in	 front	 of	 all	 the	 Brahmins	 and	 Pundit	 Dhaumya,	 that	 you
would	make	me	the	best	archer	in	the	world.	Have	you	forgotten?	You	have	eaten
the	 salt	 of	 Hastinapura	 but	 have	 betrayed	 us	 by	 teaching	 an	 Untouchable	 greater
skill	than	the	Princes	of	the	kingdom.”
Drona	 stood	 still;	 shocked	 into	 silence	 by	 the	 words	 of	 the	 student	 he	 loved	 the
most.
“Forgive	him,	Arjuna.	He	may	have	needed	the	extra	money.	Do	not	talk	so	rudely
to	our	Guru.”	Yudhishtra	said	smoothly.
The	 words	 stung	 the	 proud	 Guru	 more	 than	 Arjuna’s	 outrage.	 They	 were
questioning	his	integrity.	‘I	have	many	faults,	but	dishonesty	is	not	one	of	them,’
thought	Drona.	“You	scoundrel!	When	did	I	teach	you?	You	liar!”	he	yelled	at	the
shocked	Nishada.
“Swami,	you	did	not	teach	me	directly.	I	learnt	by	watching	you	train	the	Princes.”
Despite	his	best	efforts,	tears	flooded	Ekalavya’s	eyes.
The	Guru	stood	watching	the	trembling	Untouchable	with	pity	and	horror,	his	mind
raging	 with	 conflicting	 emotions.	 The	 warrior	 in	 him	 wanted	 to	 hug	 the	 boy	 and
declare	to	the	world	that	he	had	found	the	most	talented	archer	of	all.	The	human
inside	 him	 wanted	 to	 celebrate	 the	 achievement	 of	 a	 poor	 Nishada	 against	 all
odds.	 But	 caste	 prejudice	 choked	 such	 foolish	 thoughts	 and	 he	 felt	 inexplicable
hatred	towards	the	Untouchable	who	had	put	him	in	such	a	fix.
“A	thief!	What	more	can	we	expect	from	his	kind?”	muttered	someone.
“He	 is	 lying,	 Guru.”	 Arjuna	 was	 still	 trembling	 with	 jealous	 rage.	 “Not	 even
Kshatriyas	 can	 become	 so	 skilled	 just	 by	 watching	 someone	 practice.	 And	 he
wants	us	to	believe	that	he,	a	mere	Nishada,	is	smarter	than	all	of	us?”
“Perhaps	he	is	even	smarter	than	Aswathama,”	Yudhishtra	said.
That	put	an	end	to	all	conflict	in	the	Guru’s	mind.	He	too	did	not	believe	anyone

could	 acquire	 such	 skill	 by	 observation	 alone.	 His	 son	 Aswathama	 was	 good;
Arjuna	 was	 better;	 but	 both	 of	 them	 got	 sufficient	 training	 from	 him.	 This	 dirty,
black	urchin	could	not	be	more	intelligent	than	either	the	Prince	or	his	own	son.
“Son,	if	what	you	say	is	true,	it	is	indeed	a	remarkable	achievement.	I	feel	proud
and	you	have	all	my	blessings,”	the	Guru	told	Ekalavya.
There	 was	 a	 collective	 sucking	 in	 of	 air	 from	 the	 Princes.	 Ekalavya	 could	 not
believe	 his	 ears.	 At	 last,	 all	 his	 hard	 work	 had	 paid	 off.	 The	 hours	 of	 practice
while	ignoring	hunger	and	thirst,	the	countless	mornings	watching	–	it	had	all	been
worth	it	just	for	this	moment.	He	fell	at	the	Guru’s	feet,	his	body	shivering	with
emotion.	He	wanted	to	kiss	the	great	man’s	feet	but	held	himself	back	as	he	did	not
wish	to	pollute	the	Brahmin.	He	kissed	the	black	earth	instead	and	felt	lucky	to	be
born	in	this	blessed	land.
The	Nishada’s	gesture	touched	a	sore	spot	in	the	Guru’s	mind.	Drona	saw	his	son
nursing	the	puppy.	How	would	his	son	manage	in	this	world	once	he	was	gone?
Despite	all	his	skills,	poverty	had	been	Drona’s	constant	companion	until	he	got
the	job	of	teaching	the	Hastinapura	Princes.	He	owed	his	position	to	the	kindness
of	 Kunti.	 This	 job	 was	 the	 only	 way	 he	 could	 ensure	 a	 proper	 education	 for	 his
son.	And	the	idiot	chose	the	wrong	Prince	to	befriend.	‘My	duty	is	to	do	what	the
sons	of	Kunti	want.	But	this	Nishada	is	also	like	my	son-in-arms,’	thought	Drona.
He	 cursed	 himself	 for	 feeling	 admiration	 and	 pity	 for	 the	 Untouchable	 lying
prostrate	at	his	feet.	Guru	Parashurama’s	angry	face	flashed	into	his	mind	and	he
moored	 his	 wavering	 thoughts	 to	 that	 solid	 rock.	 Everything	 became	 clear
suddenly.	 This	 Nishada	 was	 challenging	 not	 only	 his	 favourite	 disciple	 and	 his
son,	but	also	the	entire	concept	of	dharma.	He	ought	to	show	no	sympathy	towards
such	upstarts.	The	Guru	took	a	deep	breath	as	he	recalled	that	glorious	day	when
he	had	won	the	Dharmaveera	title	all	those	years	ago.	Had	he	not	taken	a	vow	that
day	to	protect	dharma,	cows,	Brahmins,	and	the	eternal	religion?	How	could	he
be	foolish	enough	to	think	of	encouraging	a	Nishada,	even	for	a	second?
“As	per	custom,	you	must	now	give	me	my	gurudakshina.”
Ekalavya	scampered	 up	 to	 stand	 with	 bowed	 head.	 “Command	 me,	 Swami,”	 he
said.	The	Nishada’s	mind	rippled	with	waves	of	ecstasy.	It	was	official	–	he	was
a	disciple	of	the	greatest	warrior	of	Hastinapura	now.	His	dream	had	come	true.
‘Shankara,	 oh	 Lord	 of	 the	 Universe,	 you	 are	 too	 kind	 to	 this	 Untouchable,’	 he

thought	in	silent	gratitude.
“I	want	your	right	thumb	as	my	fee.”
A	shocked	silence	followed	Drona’s	words.	Even	Arjuna	flinched	when	he	heard
it.	Only	Bhima	looked	confused	and	asked	his	twin	brothers	what	the	cranky	Guru
was	going	to	do	with	a	thumb.
The	world	came	crashing	down	upon	Ekalavya.	His	mind	and	body	became	numb.
He	 knew	 it	 was	 the	 end	 of	 his	 dreams.	 As	 a	 lefthander,	 his	 right	 thumb	 was
important.	He	would	never	again	be	able	to	grip	the	heavy	Indian	bow	without	the
thumb	of	his	right	hand.	The	cunning	Brahmin	had	finished	the	archer	in	him	with
one	move.	Ekalavya	stood	erect,	his	head	held	high.	He	looked	at	the	faces	of	the
Princes	around	him	and	wondered	at	the	privileges	of	being	born	into	luxury	and
wealth.	Then	he	gazed	at	his	calloused	black	hands.	A	beast	cried	in	the	jungle,	as
if	 to	 beckon	 him	 back	 to	 the	 world	 where	 he	 belonged.	 He	 looked	 up	 at	 Arjuna
and	 saw	 the	 Prince	 avert	 his	 gaze.	 Then	 Ekalavya	 took	 the	 sharp	 hunting	 knife
from	 his	 waist	 and	 bowed	 to	 the	 great	 Guru	 one	 last	 time.	 He	 knelt	 and	 firmly
spread	his	right	palm	on	the	earth.
Yudhishtra	went	pale	at	the	thought	of	what	he	was	about	to	witness	and	looked
away.	Suyodhana	turned	from	the	task	of	tending	the	puppy	to	look	at	the	Princes
behind	him,	surprised	at	their	sudden	silence.	He	sensed	something	horrible	was
about	to	happen	and	ran	towards	them,	leaving	the	arrows	he	had	extricated	from
the	puppy’s	eyes,	on	the	ground.	Aswathama	and	Sushasana	followed.
Suyodhana	 saw	 the	 flashing	 arc	 of	 the	 falling	 blade	 and	 shouted	 out.	 The	 razor
sharp	hunting	knife	severed	Ekalavya’s	thumb	and	it	fell	away.	Blood	spurted	from
the	open	wound,	spattering	the	Guru’s	white	dhoti.	Drona	did	not	bother	to	look
down;	his	eyes	remained	on	the	setting	sun.	Suyodhana	shouted	at	the	Guru	but	his
fury	did	not	touch	Drona.	Instead,	Bhima	shoved	the	Prince	and	soon	the	Pandavas
and	the	Kauravas	were	fighting	like	mad	dogs	around	the	Guru.	Drona	could	not
have	cared	less.	As	the	black	Nishada	boy	lay	prostrate	at	his	feet	and	his	students
were	busy	trying	to	murder	each	other,	the	learned	man	wracked	his	brains	to	scan
through	 the	 holy	 books	 for	 the	 words	 that	 would	 tell	 him	 he	 had	 done	 the	 right
thing.	But	all	he	heard	was	silence.
Aswathama’s	 angry	 words	 finally	 pierced	 the	 Guru’s	 numb	 mind.	 As	 the	 sun

disappeared	 behind	 the	 tall	 trees,	 leaving	 a	 few	 idiots	 to	 fight	 over	 silly	 things
like	 the	 broken	 dreams	 of	 an	 Untouchable,	 the	 Guru	 remained	 standing	 with	 his
hands	crossed	across	his	broad	chest.	A	dusty	black	thumb	lay	at	his	feet,	mocking
all	 his	 learning	 and	 greatness.	 ‘My	 son,	 why	 are	 you	 so	 blind	 to	 your	 father’s
love?	 Can	 you	 not	 see	 that	 it	 is	 all	 for	 your	 future?	 You	 may	 think	 I	 did	 this	 for
Arjuna,	 but	 it	 was	 really	 for	 you,	 Aswathama.’	 The	 Guru’s	 tears	 finally	 found
release	and	streamed	down	his	grizzled	face.
***

The	Nishada	slowly	awakened	to	consciousness	at	the	feet	of	the	Brahmin	Guru.
He	had	no	eyes	for	the	fight	the	Crown	Prince	was	putting	up	for	him	against	his
cousins.	Nor	had	he	ears	for	the	angry	words	a	Brahmin	boy	was	showering	on	his
great	father.	He	had	not	sought	anything	extraordinary.	All	he	needed	was	a	little
space	 to	 grow	 and	 a	 word	 of	 recognition	 from	 the	 man	 he	 admired,	 for	 all	 his
dedication	and	hard	work.	He	had	paid	the	required	fee	with	shattered	ambition,
for	 the	 knowledge	 he	 had	 stolen.	 Ekalavya	 ran	 into	 the	 welcoming	 arms	 of	 the
jungle,	far	from	civilized	Hastinapura	and	the	holy	men	who	inhabited	it.	He	ran
until	he	was	sure	he	was	safe	in	the	embrace	of	nature	and	then	he	collapsed	onto
the	moist	earth.	The	forest	was	unusually	warm	and	humid	and	he	felt	as	safe	as	a
baby	in	the	womb.	He	had	not	wept	when	he	severed	his	own	thumb	and	buried
his	 dreams,	 but	 now,	 with	 the	 trees	 as	 his	 only	 witnesses	 and	 a	 crescent	 moon
leering	from	the	sky	above,	the	son	of	the	forest	broke	into	wracking	sobs.
Two	pairs	of	eyes,	hidden	behind	the	entwined	vines	of	a	crooked	tree	looked	at
the	shaking	form	of	the	Nishada.	As	his	agonized	sobs	grew	into	animal	howls,	the
two	 Nagas	 who	 had	 been	 trailing	 him	 for	 the	 past	 few	 days,	 rushed	 through	 the
forest	canopy	like	a	couple	of	monkeys,	with	a	message	for	Takshaka.	Later	that
night,	the	Naga	leader	said	to	his	faithful	aide	Kaliya	that	the	time	for	revolution
was	near.	The	severed	thumb	of	a	black	man	would	spark	the	fire.
***

The	 Guru	 continued	 standing	 alone	 for	 a	 long	 time	 after	 everyone	 else	 had	 left.
The	dark	night	cloaked	him.	He	did	not	see	Ekalavya	leave.	Nor	did	he	care	when
Vidhura,	 who	 had	 come	 to	 investigate	 the	 ruckus,	 herded	 the	 Princes	 and	 the
Guru’s	 son,	 towards	 the	 palace	 after	 breaking	 up	 the	 fight.	 Drona	 merely	 stood
with	downcast	face,	looking	at	the	lifeless	thumb	of	the	Untouchable,	wondering

what	he	had	done.
Had	 he	 turned,	 he	 would	 have	 seen	 the	 wounded	 dog	 slowly	 get	 to	 its	 feet	 and
sniff	the	air	as	if	unable	to	decide	whether	it	should	trust	the	forest	with	its	lurking
beasts	or	the	city.	It	foolishly	continued	to	believe	men	were	less	dangerous	than
the	beasts	of	the	jungle.	On	tottering	feet,	it	found	its	way	to	the	teeming	streets	of
Hastinapura.	 By	 a	 miracle,	 no	 carriages	 ran	 it	 over.	 A	 few	 hurrying	 pedestrians
did	indeed	kick	it	away,	but	the	dog	kept	walking	blindly.	When	it	smelt	food,	it
stopped.	 A	 human	 hand	 brought	 the	 inviting	 smell	 close	 to	 its	 muzzle.	 The	 dog
hesitated,	 afraid	 of	 this	 sudden	 kindness.	 Then	 hunger	 overcame	 fear	 and	 it
grabbed	the	food	from	the	dark	hand	that	offered	it.
Drona	returned	home	at	midnight.	He	did	not	see	the	man	asleep	on	the	footpath	or
the	blind	puppy	lying	curled	in	Jara’s	arms.	Not	that	he	would	have	cared,	but	had
he	bothered	to	look,	he	would	have	seen	true	happiness	in	the	peaceful	face	of	the
homeless	man.

15	DHARMA
ARJUNA	WOKE	WITH	A	START,	SWEATING	PROFUSELY.	He	gazed	into	the	pitch	darkness

outside.	Not	even	a	leaf	stirred.	He	could	hear	the	soft	breathing	of	his	brothers
and	mother.	What	a	nightmare!	He	quietly	opened	the	door	and	stood	gripping	the
balustrade	of	the	 balcony.	 However	 hard	 he	 tried	 to	 shake	 off	 the	 image	 of	 the
bloody	black	finger	lying	lifeless	in	the	mud,	it	kept	returning	to	haunt	him.	What
had	he	done?	Why	had	the	Guru	done	such	an	unspeakable	thing?	He	tried	to	recall
the	Nishada’s	face	but	the	only	thing	that	came	to	mind	was	the	severed	thumb	at
the	Guru’s	feet.
“Why	 are	 you	 standing	 here,	 Arjuna?”	 His	 mother’s	 voice	 shook	 him	 out	 of	 his
reverie.	“Why	are	you	sweating?	Do	you	have	a	fever?”	Kunti	approached	her	son
with	concern	and	put	a	cool	hand	on	his	burning	brow.
“Mother,	I	 want	to	 ask	you	 something.	Is	it	so	important	that	I	should	win	every
time?	Is	it	necessary	that	I	should	be	the	greatest	archer?”
“Arjuna,	you	know	we	are	all	alone.	We	have	no	one	to	support	us,	except	perhaps
Dhaumya.	I	am	a	widow	but	I	want	the	best	for	my	children.	No	one	can	say	Kunti
has	not	brought	you	up	well.”
“But	 mother,	 today	 I	 was	 responsible	 for	 a	 heinous	 thing.	 Is	 it	 right	 to	 deny
someone	knowledge	just	because	he	is	of	low	caste?	For	a	moment,	I	despised	my
Guru	for	what	he	did.	I	feel	ashamed	I	was	responsible	for	his	action.”
“Do	 not	 let	 a	 Nishada	 worry	 you,	 Arjuna.	 I	 heard	 about	 the	 incident	 from
Yudhishtra.	 Though	 I	 may	 not	 agree	 with	 the	 way	 Guru	 Drona	 dealt	 with	 the
Nishada,	please	do	not	judge	him	by	this	one	incident.	He	has	your	best	interests
at	 heart.	 Who	 knows,	 that	 Nishada	 might	 have	 become	 a	 member	 of	 Takshaka’s
army.	It	was	for	everyone’s	good	that	Drona	did	what	he	did.	Everyone	has	their
own	 dharma.	 As	 a	 Kshatriya,	 your	 dharma	 is	 to	 be	 a	 great	 warrior.	 As
Yudhishtra’s	brother,	your	dharma	is	also	to	help	him	gain	the	throne.	He	has	to
have	your	support.	Not	only	him,	but...”

“Mother,	I	know	all	that.	Yet	that	Nishada’s	thumb	refuses	to	leave	my	mind.	He
was	 such	 a	 fine	 archer.	 Better	 than	 me.	 I	 have	 begun	 doubting	 our	 definition	 of
dharma.”
“The	path	of	dharma	is	never	going	to	be	easy,	son.	Tomorrow	you	may	have	to
raise	 your	 hand	 against	 your	 loved	 ones	 for	 its	 sake.	 The	 reward	 of	 dharma	 is
dharma	itself.”
“Even	at	the	cost	of	human	suffering?	Even	at	the	cost	of	death?”
Kunti	sighed.	She	wondered	how	to	explain	something,	which	she	herself	did	not
understand	 properly.	 She	 moved	 towards	 her	 son	 and	 lifted	 his	 chin.	 “Arjuna,
promise	me	you	will	fight	for	your	brother,	and	for	your	mother,	who	has	seen	only
misery	 in	 her	 life.	 Promise	 me	 that	 you	 will	 behave	 like	 a	 Kshatriya	 and	 defeat
that	evil	son	of	Gandhari.”
Arjuna	 remained	 silent	 for	 a	 long	 time,	 while	 Kunti	 waited	 anxiously.	 Then	 he
said,	 “I	 do	 not	 know	 anything	 about	 dharma.	 I	 am	 not	 even	 sure	 my	 cousin
Suyodhana	is	evil.	But	how	can	I	deny	my	mother	anything	she	asks?	Even	at	the
cost	 of	 my	 own	 happiness,	 I	 will	 do	 whatever	 is	 possible	 to	 make	 my	 brother
King.	I	only	hope	when	the	time	comes,	my	hand	will	remain	steady.”
Arjuna	 did	 not	 wait	 to	 hear	 his	 mother	 sigh	 in	 relief.	 He	 disappeared	 into	 the
darkness.	Kunti	stood	staring	at	a	faint	light	emanating	from	a	home	far	away.	‘If
only	 Pandu	 had	 been	 older	 than	 Dhritarashtra,’	 she	 thought	 wistfully.	 Then	 there
would	 have	 been	 no	 confusion	 regarding	 Yudhishtra	 being	 King.	 There	 would
have	been	no	need	for	this	cold	war	with	Gandhari.	She	often	wondered	who	was
the	more	unlucky	one,	Gandhari	or	her?	‘I	have	suffered	enough.	I	will	not	rest	till
my	 firstborn	 becomes	 Emperor	 of	 India,’	 Kunti	 thought	 with	 grim	 determination.
She	felt	the	old	familiar	pain	for	which	there	was	no	cure.	Firstborn!	Where	 was
her	 firstborn?	 Perhaps	 everything	 would	 change	 if	 he	 came	 back.	 Then	 there
would	 be	 no	 question	 of	 who	 was	 the	 elder.	 Neither	 Suyodhana	 nor	 Yudhishtra
would	 be	 the	 legitimate	 heir.	 Kunti	 wondered	 for	 the	 millionth	 time	 whether	 he
was	 alive	 and	 how	 he	 looked.	 The	 faint	 light	 in	 the	 distance	 burnt	 bright	 for	 a
moment	and	died.	She	remained	in	still	silence	as	darkness	enveloped	her.
***

In	 the	 home	 where	 the	 last	 light	 had	 gone	 out,	 a	 Brahmin	 lay	 shivering	 as	 fever
burned	his	body.	“Kripi,	has	he	come	back?”
“Not	yet.”	She	had	answered	the	same	question	many	times	since	her	husband	had
returned.
Suddenly,	Drona	sat	up.	“He	has	come.	Open	the	door,	woman.”
Kripi	rushed	to	the	front	door	and	 opened	it.	Aswathama	entered	and	walked	 to
his	 room	in	silence.	“Son,	come	and	have	your	food,”	Kripi	called.	But	her	son
slammed	 the	 door	 shut	 without	 answering	 her.	 Kripi	 looked	 at	 her	 husband	 who
sat	with	his	eyes	fixed	on	the	spot	where	his	son	had	been.	She	closed	the	front
door	 and	 gently	 pushed	 her	 husband	 down	 on	 the	 bed.	 She	 resumed	 wiping	 his
forehead	with	a	wet	cloth.
“Kripi,	shall	we	go	back?”	he	asked	her	softly.	She	did	not	reply.	“I	did	something
today	that	no	human	being	should	have	done.”	Drona	turned	his	head	away	from
his	wife	and	stared	at	the	blank	wall.
Kripi	rose	to	light	the	lamp,	but	he	caught	her	wrist	and	made	her	sit	down	near
him.	Drona	told	her	how	he	had	claimed	his	fee	from	the	poor	Nishada.	She	was
shocked,	thankful	for	the	darkness	that	hid	her	face.
“I	did	it	for	him	Kripi,	and	he	won’t	even	look	at	my	face.	He	keeps	company	with
that	 evil	 Prince.	 He	 has	 spoilt	 our	 boy.	 He	 is	 doomed,	 that	 Suyodhana.	 He	 has
unleashed	forces	that	will	consume	everything	we	cherish	and	destroy	the	social
order.	I	do	not	have	anything	against	Nishadas,	or	anyone	for	that	matter.	But	our
forefathers	made	rules	for	a	purpose.	Everyone	should	know	their	place.	See	what
your	 brother	 Kripa’s	 preaching	 has	 done.	 See	 what	 Bhishma’s	 odd	 ideas	 have
done	 to	 our	 society.	 There	 is	 no	 order	 to	 anything.	 Shudras	 become	 Prime
Ministers	 and	 Nishadas	 aspire	 to	 become	 Kshatriyas.	 The	 social	 order	 is
collapsing.”
“We	are	Brahmins.	What	is	our	dharma?”	Kripi	asked.
“To	teach,	to	know	the	truth,	to	learn,	to	think	and	guide…”	Drona	stopped	midsentence	 and	 turned	 angrily	 towards	 his	 wife.	 “Are	 you	 accusing	 me	 of	 not
following	my	caste	dharma?”

“Ask	 yourself,”	 Kripi	 said,	 as	 she	 picked	 up	 the	 bowl	 with	 the	 water	 and	 rag
cloth,	and	moved	towards	the	kitchen.
A	crescent	moon	had	escaped	the	clutches	of	the	clouds	and	sneaked	into	the	dark
house.	Drona	stood	up,	angered	by	his	wife’s	words	and	went	into	the	puja	room.
He	 saw	 the	 idol	 of	 the	 dancing	 Nataraja	 shining	 resplendent	 in	 the	 moonlight.
Impulsively,	he	fell	to	the	floor	in	obeisance	and	began	reciting	the	108	names	of
Shiva	to	calm	his	turbulent	mind.	When	he	felt	his	mind	calm	and	become	silent,
he	slowly	raised	his	head	to	gaze	at	his	God…	and	shouted	in	horror!
Kripi	rushed	in	from	the	kitchen,	toppling	vessels	and	utensils.	Aswathama	came
running,	almost	colliding	with	his	mother.
“Aswathama,	 look…	 look…	 the	 Lord	 has	 only	 four	 fingers....	 His	 thumb	 is
missing.	See	his	face…	it	is	that	Nishada…	it	is	he....	What	have	I	done,	Kripi?”
Mother	and	son	looked	at	each	other	in	dismay.	They	could	see	the	bronze	idol	of
the	 dancing	 Shiva	 they	 had	 brought	 with	 them	 from	 the	 South.	 It	 was	 perfectly
crafted.
“Kripi,	 can’t	 you	 see…	 I	 have	 sinned.	 The	 Lord	 came	 to	 test	 me	 and	 I	 failed.	 I
failed	 as	 a	 Guru,	 as	 a	 Brahmin,	 as	 a	 human….	 What	 have	 I	 done?”	 he	 cried	 in
agony.
There	was	a	sudden	banging	on	the	door.	Aswathama	hurried	to	open	it	as	Kripi
tried	to	calm	her	husband.
“What	is	this	ruckus?”	Dhaumya	and	a	group	of	Brahmins	entered.
“Come	with	me,	Guru.	Let	me	explain,”	he	said,	going	to	sit	near	Drona,	who	was
still	kneeling	on	the	floor.	“Let	us	discuss	this	between	us	so	things	become	clear.
It	is	sad,	but	you	did	what	was	required.	Come	with	me.”
Drona	finally	stood	up	and	nodded	at	the	Priest.
“You	are	not	taking	my	father	anywhere,”	Aswathama	moved	to	cut	off	their	exit.
Dhaumya	and	Aswathama	stood	glaring	at	each	other.
“Let	 him	 go,	 son,”	 Kripi	 told	 her	 son.	 Reluctantly	 Aswathama	 turned	 away.	 As

mother	and	son	watched,	Guru	Drona	walked	to	the	banks	of	the	Ganga	with	his
fellow	Brahmins.
***

Jara	 arrived	 in	 Durjaya’s	 dangerous	 world	 a	 few	 months	 after	 he	 had	 run	 away
from	 Ekalavya.	 He	 walked	 the	 whole	 night	 and	 found	 himself	 on	 the	 Royal
highway.	By	morning,	he	was	starving	and	he	was	desperately	in	need	of	rest.	The
angry	stares	of	strangers	did	not	bother	him	at	first.	He	was	an	illiterate,	without
any	knowledge	of	the	smritis.	He	was	unaware	that	he	was	breaking	caste	rules	by
walking	through	streets	forbidden	to	people	like	him.	As	there	were	guards	on	the
streets	 and	 no	 official	 rule	 against	 Untouchables,	 no	 one	 dared	 stop	 him.	 The
Priests	 knew	 overt	 discrimination	 would	 invite	 the	 wrath	 of	 Lord	 Bhishma
himself,	 so	 they	 merely	 seethed	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 an	 Untouchable	 polluting	 the
avenues	of	Hastinapura	and	waited	for	the	urchin	to	break	a	written	law.
The	opportunity	came	sooner	than	they	expected.	The	Priests	had	underestimated
the	 desperation	 of	 the	 hungry	 boy.	 For	 them,	 hunger	 was	 an	 abstract	 concept,
maya,	an	illusion,	but	for	Jara	it	was	a	harsh	reality.	The	Untouchable	walked	into
the	temple.	The	Priests	gasped	in	horror.	Jara	did	not	see	Shiva	smiling	broadly	at
him,	for	his	eyes	was	fixed	on	the	sweets	piled	on	a	silver	platter	for	the	god	of
stone	to	eat.	The	Nishada	grabbed	the	sweets	with	both	hands	and	then	felt	a	sharp
sting	on	his	back.	The	glowering	Head	Priest	held	a	whip.	The	next	lash	cut	open
Jara’s	face.	But	the	boy	still	would	not	let	go	of	the	sweets.	He	stuffed	the	food
into	his	hungry	mouth	and	grabbed	more,	not	bothering	to	wipe	the	blood	flowing
down	his	cheeks.	Someone	kicked	away	the	platter	and	the	sweets	scattered	over
the	temple	floor.	It	was	no	longer	a	divine	offering	fit	for	God.	It	was	now	filth,
polluted	by	dirty	black	hands.
Jara	fell	to	the	ground,	grabbing	at	the	food.	The	next	kick	was	aimed	at	his	chin.
“Bastard!	I	just	bathed	and	will	now	have	to	bathe	again,”	shouted	one	Priest	as
he	 kicked	 Jara	 repeatedly.	 The	 other	 Priests	 kept	 away	 as	 they	 did	 not	 wish	 to
touch	 either	 the	 Untouchable	 or	 the	 angry	 Priest,	 who	 was	 now	 polluted	 by	 the
boy.	Jara	was	sure	he	was	going	to	die.	His	only	thought	was	to	eat	as	much	as
possible	 before	 they	 killed	 him.	 When	 he	 raised	 his	 head	 to	 see	 what	 was
happening,	he	was	astonished	to	see	his	assailant	go	flying	through	the	air,	hit	the
deity,	and	collapse	in	a	heap.	A	huge	Brahmin	was	standing	nearby.	He	grabbed
the	 whip	 from	 the	 Head	 Priest’s	 hand	 and	 Jara	 braced	 for	 it	 to	 connect	 with	 his

scrawny	body.	He	closed	his	eyes	in	fear.	He	heard	the	whip	crack	and	a	scream
pierced	his	ears	but	he	did	not	feel	any	pain.	Slowly,	he	opened	his	eyes.	He	could
hardly	believe	what	he	was	seeing.
“How	is	it	now,	you	scoundrel?	How	do	you	feel?	Hitting	a	small	boy,	eh?	Which
scriptures	tell	you	to	do	that,	you	dogs?”
The	huge	Brahmin	obviously	knew	how	to	use	the	whip.	He	swung	it	with	terrific
effect	and	perfect	aim.	The	Priests	were	running	here	and	there,	trying	to	escape
the	assault.	Jara	found	that	his	mad	saviour	had	locked	the	door	of	the	temple	and
trapped	 the	 Priests	 inside.	 Jara	 and	 a	 grinning	 Shiva	 were	 the	 only	 witnesses	 to
the	assault.
“Kripa,	 you	 will	 rot	 in	 hell!	 You	 are	 hurting	 Brahmins…	 sin…	 sin.”	 The	 Head
Priest	tried	uttering	a	curse	between	his	agonized	cries.	He	was	bleeding	all	over
and	purple	rashes	were	breaking	out	on	his	paunch	and	back.
Kripa	laughed	loudly	and	kept	lashing	the	hapless	Priests.	He	only	stopped	when
they	stopped	whining	and	blabbering.	Satisfied,	Kripa	threw	the	lash	at	the	Head
Priest	 and	 said,	 “If	 you	 run	 to	 that	 fool	 Dhaumya,	 or	 that	 woman	 Kunti,	 to
complain,	I	will	come	again.	Next	time	I	will	not	take	so	much	time,	for	instead	of
a	whip,	I	will	use	my	sword.	Have	you	understood,	you	idiots,	or	do	you	want	me
to	say	it	in	poetic	Sanskrit?”
The	Priests	did	not	dare	open	their	mouths.	Kripa	saw	Jara	looking	wistfully	at	the
crushed	sweets	on	the	ground.	He	picked	the	boy	up	and	kicked	open	the	temple
doors.	He	put	the	boy	down	only	when	he	reached	the	Banyan	tree	he	usually	sat
under.	 “Are	 you	 a	 fool	 to	 take	 those	 sweets	 from	 the	 temple?”	 he	 asked	 Jara
incredulously.
“I	am	hungry,”	Jara	stated	with	touching	simplicity.
Kripa	felt	tears	fill	his	eyes	for	the	first	time	in	many	years.	“Come,	I	will	buy	you
food,”	 he	 said,	 and	 crossed	 the	 street	 towards	 a	 vendor	 selling	 ripe	 yellow
mangoes	and	home-cooked	food.
Jara	followed.	When	they	reached	the	vendor,	Kripa	searched	through	the	folds	of
his	 dhoti	 and	 cursed.	 He	 had	 no	 money	 on	 him,	 having	 lost	 everything	 in	 the

previous	day’s	play.	He	called	out	to	a	rich	merchant	who	was	passing	by,	“Hey,
can’t	you	see	a	Brahmin	standing	here?	Why	do	you	not	offer	me	anything?”
The	 Vaishya	 looked	 at	 Kripa	 apologetically	 and	 fumbled	 with	 the	 strings	 of	 his
cloth	 purse,	 drawing	 out	 a	 few	 coins.	 He	 bowed	 to	 the	 insulted	 Brahmin	 and
handed	 over	 the	 money.	 Kripa	 blessed	 the	 merchant,	 who	 went	 away	 with	 a
pleased	expression.
“Don’t	 look	 at	 me	 like	 that.”	 Kripa	 winked	 at	 the	 Nishada,	 handing	 over	 some
money	to	the	food	vendor.	“I	do	not	do	it	often.	I	earn	my	food	through	my	own
labours.	Today	I	did	not	have	the	luxury	of	showing	you	that	resolve.	You	are	too
hungry.	Every	principle	is	broken	one	day	or	another	and	if	it	is	for	the	right	cause,
there	is	nothing	wrong	in	that.	Your	hunger	is	right	enough	for	me.	Perplexed?	Do
not	bother,	just	eat.”
Jara	 ate	 silently	 as	 Kripa	 looked	 at	 him.	 Kripa	 was	 feeling	 pleased.	 He	 had
wanted	to	beat	up	the	temple	Priests	for	quite	some	time	now	and	he	was	grateful
the	boy	had	provided	him	with	the	opportunity.
Jara	marvelled	at	how	easy	it	was	to	get	food	here.	You	only	had	to	ask	and	it	was
given.	He	also	observed	that	one	could	exchange	coins	for	food.	That	night,	while
Kripa	slept,	Jara	fumbled	in	the	folds	 of	the	Brahmin’s	 waistcloth	for	coins	 and
then	 ran	 away	 to	 the	 poorer	 parts	 of	 the	 city	 with	 his	 loot.	 He	 did	 not	 feel	 any
remorse	or	guilt	at	his	action.	Thereafter,	the	coins	gave	him	food	and	he	ate	well
until	 they	 ran	 out.	 When	 he	 had	 none	 left,	 he	 started	 asking	 people	 for	 food	 but
found	 it	 was	 difficult	 to	 get	 them	 to	 part	 with	 their	 money.	 Something	 else	 was
required	to	coax	them.	Kripa	had	used	his	sacred	thread,	but	Jara	did	not	have	that
option.	 Instead,	 he	 began	 using	 a	 knife	 to	 threaten	 people.	 Sometimes	 he
succeeded,	at	other	times	he	was	beaten	up.	But	he	took	it	all	in	his	stride.	It	was
all	 part	 of	 life.	 He	 began	 earning	 notoriety	 in	 the	 neighbourhood.	 Like	 a	 fox,	 he
crawled	into	his	hiding	place	under	a	small	bridge	during	the	day.	Nights	were	for
prowling,	 scavenging	 and	 hunting.	 The	 beast	 that	 was	 born	 when	 Ekalavya
thrashed	him,	was	now	fully	grown	and	learning	to	survive	in	the	urban	jungle.
Jara	never	forgot	the	beating	he	received	from	the	Priests,	so	he	was	particularly
vicious	 when	 his	 victims	 were	 Brahmins.	 It	 was	 inevitable	 that	 his	 notoriety
reached	the	ears	of	the	lord	of	the	underworld	–	Durjaya.	He	had	special	need	of
such	boys.	So	Jara	was	sucked	into	Durjaya’s	world	with	ease.	Jara	was	excited

by	his	new	life.	No	one	asked	him	his	caste.	There	were	people	here	of	all	castes
and	creeds	and	there	was	a	strange	equality	and	honour	among	them.	Money	was
plentiful	and	so	was	food.
There	were	other	gangs	sprouting	up	in	other	slums	of	the	great	city.	Often,	gang
wars	broke	out	between	them.	The	gangs	played	a	deadly	cat-and-mouse	game	in
the	dark	alleys	of	Hastinapura.	The	city	police	sometimes	joined	in	the	fun.	But	the
others	were	small	timers.	Durjaya	knew	he	owed	his	strength	to	the	support	from
across	the	border	and	the	pleasure	of	the	Gandhara	Prince.	He	was	careful	not	to
squander	such	support.	He	cultivated	competition	among	his	young	men	and	girls,
to	motivate	them	in	their	adventurous	life	of	crime.	But	Jara	would	nevertheless
have	ended	life	as	an	unidentified	corpse	in	the	gutters	of	the	city	soon,	had	fate
not	 intervened.	 His	 destiny	 was	 not	 to	 be	 a	 martyr	 in	 a	 gang	 war	 at	 the	 age	 of
seventeen.	The	Gods	had	other	plans	for	him.	They	would	not	let	him	die	so	easily
and	end	his	suffering	so	quickly.
Five	 years	 had	 passed	 since	 Jara	 had	 stolen	 from	 Kripa.	 He	 was	 a	 young	 man
now,	 full	 of	 the	 vigour	 of	 life.	 He	 was	 also	 an	 assistant	 leader	 in	 the	 gang	 of
teenage	boys	who	broke	into	people’s	homes	in	the	dead	of	night	and	robbed	them.
A	 lad	 in	 his	 early	 twenties	 called	 Daya	 was	 the	 leader	 of	 their	 group.	 Durjaya
used	a	beautiful	girl	as	bait,	to	create	a	stiff	rivalry	between	Jara	and	Daya.	She
flirted	 with	 them	 both	 and	 egged	 them	 on	 to	 perform	 daredevil	 feats.	 The	 boys
competed	 with	 each	 other	 in	 cruelty	 and	 crime	 to	 please	 the	 girl	 and	 their	 boss.
Daya	seemed	to	hold	the	edge	and	it	made	Jara	burn	with	jealousy	and	anger.	He
wanted	to	prove	himself.
Jara	 had	 kept	 a	 Brahmin’s	 house	 under	 surveillance	 for	 the	 past	 few	 days.	 The
house	was	close	to	the	fort	and	that	added	an	element	of	risk.	It	was	both	fun	and
adventurous	to	loot	a	house	so	near	the	guarded	precincts	of	the	fort.	The	Brahmin
seemed	to	be	a	singer	and	many	rich	people	visited	him	on	most	days	to	hear	him
sing.	He	did	not	seem	particularly	prosperous,	but	that	could	have	been	because
he	wished	to	hide	his	wealth.	If	he	was	not	wealthy,	how	could	he	afford	to	feed
those	 who	 visited	 him?	 Some	 days	 there	 would	 be	 a	 crowd	 at	 his	 door	 and	 on
other	days,	no	one.	Jara	waited	for	the	monsoon	as	it	would	be	easier	to	act	under
the	cover	of	rain.	No	one	would	hear	his	victims	scream.
Ten	 days	 after	 the	 rains	 broke	 and	 the	 drains	 of	Hastinapura	 were	 overflowing,
Jara	revealed	his	plan	to	his	gang	members.	Daya	remained	unimpressed.	He	had

learnt	that	real	wealth	lay	not	with	the	Brahmins	or	Kshatriyas,	but	the	merchant
Vaishyas.	He	had	marked	a	rich	silk	merchant’s	mansion	as	that	night’s	target	and
did	not	wish	to	hear	about	Jara’s	harebrained	scheme	to	loot	some	singer.	The	girl
they	both	wanted	giggled,	and	Jara	threw	his	wine	tumbler	to	the	floor	with	great
violence.	He	would	show	them,	these	grinning	nitwits.	The	gang	left	together	for
the	city	in	the	dead	of	night	but	Jara	slipped	away	when	they	neared	the	singer’s
house.	Daya	shook	his	head	and	continued	on	his	way.
Jara	 gritted	 his	 teeth	 at	 the	 mockery	 gleaming	 in	 his	 rival’s	 eyes.	 It	 was	 raining
heavily	 when	 he	 jumped	 the	 small	 wall	 that	 separated	 the	 house	 from	 the	 street.
Somewhere	a	dog	howled	and	thunder	clapped	in	the	sky.	He	walked	around	the
house,	trying	each	window	and	door	lightly	to	gain	entry.	When	he	found	them	all
bolted,	he	decided	to	clamber	onto	the	thatched	roof	and	jump	in.	It	was	a	slippery
climb	 in	 the	 rain	 and	 his	 progress	 was	 slow.	 Twice,	 in	 the	 lighting,	 he	 saw	 the
silhouettes	of	the	guards	on	the	fort	walls.	He	moved	towards	what	he	thought	was
the	 kitchen	 and	 made	 a	 hole	 in	 the	 thatch	 to	 peer	 in.	 He	 could	 hear	 whispers
coming	 from	 the	 dining	 room	 and	 see	 a	 faint	 glow	 of	 light.	 Jara	 cursed.	 He	 had
expected	the	household	to	be	sound	asleep.	He	could	not	wait	much	longer	as	the
guards	might	see	him.	He	slowly	crawled	through	the	hole	in	the	roof	and	jumped
down,	landing	softly	on	all	fours.
Krishna,	 you	 are	 the	 only	 food	 we	 need.	 Your	 compassion	 feeds	 my	 hungry
stomach	 and	those	of	my	wife	and	children.	How	we	rejoice	in	your	play,	and
lose	ourselves	in	your	ways,	Achyuta,	Madhava…	Something	in	the	voice	of	the
singer	arrested	Jara	for	a	moment.	He	had	drawn	his	knife	and	could	see	shadows
moving	in	the	room	beyond	the	kitchen.
“Enough	 of	 your	 prayers!	 The	 children	 are	 hungry	 and	 have	 not	 eaten	 anything
since	 yesterday.	 What	 use	 is	 your	 Krishna	 if	 he	 cannot	 even	 give	 us	 food?”	 A
woman’s	 voice	 rose	 in	 irritation	 and	 Jara	 flinched.	 They	 had	 not	 eaten	 in	 two
days?	And	he	of	all	people	had	come	to	loot	this	house?	Jara	was	shocked.
A	child,	barely	four	years	old,	walked	into	the	kitchen.	Jara	tried	to	move	deeper
into	the	shadows,	but	the	child	saw	him	and	giggled.	He	did	not	know	what	to	do.
He	 tried	 to	 hide	 the	 knife	 he	 held.	 Had	 he	 not	 heard	 about	 the	 hunger	 in	 the
Brahmin’s	 home,	 the	 beast	 in	 him	 would	 not	 have	 hesitated	 to	 plunge	 the	 blade
into	the	soft	body	of	the	girl.	But	he	knew	what	hunger	was,	he	knew	its	pain.	He
could	not	kill	anyone	who	was	hungry.

“Bhavani,	 come	 here	 and	 eat,”	 the	 woman	 called.	 When	 the	 little	 girl	 did	 not
move,	 the	 mother	 came	 into	 the	 kitchen.	 She	 was	 shocked	 to	 find	 a	 man	 with	 a
knife	there	and	stood	frozen.	Recovering	in	a	flash,	she	grabbed	the	little	girl	and
screamed.	Outside,	the	rain	lashed	down	in	unmitigated	fury,	rattling	the	doors	and
windows	 of	 the	 old	 house.	 The	 woman	 ran	 with	 Bhavani	 towards	 her	 two	 boys
and	threw	her	protective	arms	around	them	all.	The	boys	were	twins,	younger	than
Bhavani,	about	three	years	old.	The	woman	huddled	in	a	corner	with	her	children,
her	teeth	chattering	in	fear.
The	Brahmin	looked	up	and	saw	Jara,	who	tightened	his	grip	on	his	knife,	ready	to
use	it	if	required.	“Krishna,	you	have	come…”	he	cried.	There	was	no	fear	in	his
voice.	 It	 was	 ecstatic,	 almost	 rapturous.	 Jara	 was	 perplexed.	 Had	 he	 come	 to	 a
mad	man’s	house?	The	Brahmin	danced	around	Jara	and	fell	at	his	feet.	“I	knew
you	would	come	one	day,	my	Lord,	my	beloved,”	he	exclaimed	joyfully.	Then	he
turned	to	his	wife.	“See	who	has	come!	Bring	the	plantain	leaf.	Give	my	Krishna
food!	 Woman,	 what	 are	 you	 doing	 there?	 Have	 you	 forgotten	 your	 duties	 to	 our
guest?”
Jara	stood	like	a	statue,	his	brain	numb.	The	Brahmin	shouted	to	his	wife	again.
She	 looked	 at	 Jara’s	 knife.	 He	 was	 embarrassed	 by	 the	 hatred	 in	 her	 eyes.	 He
threw	the	weapon	to	the	floor.	The	hint	of	a	smile	played	on	her	pale	lips	and	he
felt	ashamed	to	have	barged	into	her	house	with	the	intention	of	harming	them.	The
Brahmin	 was	 still	 prancing	 around	 excitedly,	 trying	 to	 arrange	 seating	 and	 a
tumbler	 of	 water	 for	 his	 guest.	 Never	 in	 Jara’s	 life	 had	 anyone	 shown	 such
happiness	at	seeing	him.	People	had	kicked,	lashed,	shouted,	stoned,	and	punched
him,	but	never	had	anyone	considered	him	a	human	being,	let	alone	a	God.	Jara
had	only	the	faintest	knowledge	of	Krishna,	who	was	becoming	known	as	a	god
man.	He	knew	many	people	had	started	worshipping	him	as	a	miracle	worker	and
an	 avatar	 of	 Lord	 Vishnu.	 In	 the	 slums,	 people	 needed	 magic	 to	 escape	 the
mundane	harshness	of	life.	Krishna	was	magic.
“I	 know	 your	 mischief,	 Krishna.	 You	 are	 acting	 as	 if	 I	 have	 not	 recognized	 you.
Please	accept	my	hospitality	and	offerings,	Lord…”	The	Brahmin	grabbed	Jara’s
hands	and	made	him	sit	on	the	floor.	He	placed	the	plantain	leaf	before	him	and
started	serving	a	sticky	porridge.	“Eat,	my	Krishna...”	the	Brahmin	urged	and	then
broke	into	a	song	of	rapture.
The	 melodious	 voice	 soothed	 the	 burning	 mind	 of	 the	 Nishada.	 The	 song	 was

about	Krishna’s	compassion,	about	how	the	Lord	tests	his	devotees.	It	was	about
the	hidden	Krishna	in	every	soul,	in	every	living	and	non-living	thing,	and	how	he
blossoms	in	love	and	acts	of	kindness.	The	words	were	about	bliss	in	nothing	and
infinite	happiness	in	everything.	Jara	did	not	possess	the	knowledge	to	understand
the	meaning	of	the	words.	It	made	no	sense	to	his	brain	but	touched	his	heart,	and
he	broke	into	sobs.	“Swami,	I	am	not	your	Krishna.	I	am	just	an	Untouchable,”	he
managed	 to	 say	 between	 sobs.	 He	 expected	 to	 be	 beaten	 or	 screamed	 at.	 If	 the
Brahmin	had	done	any	such	thing,	the	beast	that	lay	dormant	in	the	Nishada’s	heart
would	have	reached	for	the	knife.
Instead,	the	Brahmin	said	softly,	“You	are	neither	touchable	nor	untouchable.	You
are	what	you	are.	You	are	Brahma,	you	are	Vishnu,	and	you	are	Maheshwara.	You
are	my	father,	my	son,	my	mother,	and	my	brother.	You	have	come	to	my	humble
abode	to	share	my	food.	You	are	my	guest	and	my	God.	Please	eat,	my	Krishna.”
He	poured	the	entire	contents	of	the	porridge	pot	onto	the	plantain	leaf	before	the
Untouchable.
Jara	 was	 unable	 to	 see	 clearly	 through	 the	 tears,	 which	 flooded	 his	 eyes,	 but	 he
picked	up	the	porridge.	It	oozed	through	his	fingers.	He	suddenly	felt	ravenous	and
attacked	the	food,	licking	the	leaf	clean.
The	mad	Brahmin	broke	into	another	song.	When	he	finished,	he	touched	his	head
to	the	floor	in	obeisance	before	Jara	and	said,	“I	am	blessed,	my	Lord.	First,	you
came	as	food	in	front	of	a	hungry	man.	Then	you	have	come	as	a	man	hungry	for
food.”	He	turned	to	his	wife	and	told	her	to	get	water	for	their	guest	to	wash	his
hands.
The	 woman	 put	 down	 her	 sleeping	 twins	 on	 the	 ground	 and	 walked	 towards	 the
kitchen.	 As	 she	 opened	 the	 door,	 a	 cold	 wind	 rushed	 in	 and	 the	 lamp	 flickered.
She	 waited	 outside	 with	 a	 pitcher	 of	 water.	 Jara	 looked	 at	 the	 twins	 and
shuddered.	 They	 looked	 emaciated	 and	 pale.	 As	 he	 moved	 outside	 to	 wash	 his
hands,	 little	 Bhavani	 followed	 him.	 He	 saw	 her	 looking	 wistfully	 at	 the	 empty
porridge	 pot.	 With	 a	 start	 he	 realised	 he	 had	 eaten	 the	 family’s	 dinner	 and	 they
would	now	go	hungry.	The	woman	gave	him	a	derisive	smile.
“Mother,	I	am	sorry…”	At	a	loss	for	words,	Jara	could	not	look	at	her.
“We	are	used	to	his	insanity,”	the	woman	said,	her	lips	twisting	in	either	pain	or	a

glimmer	of	amusement.
“I	thought	you	were	rich.	I	have	seen	many	wealthy	men	visiting	this	house.	That	is
why…”	Jara	could	not	complete	his	words.
“So	 you	 came	 to	 rob	 us.	 If	 you	 had	 just	 asked	 him,	 he	 would	 have	 given	 you
whatever	you	wanted…	not	that	we	have	much.”
The	 little	 girl	 came	 to	 stand	 near	 her	 mother.	 The	 woman	 picked	 her	 up	 and
planted	 kisses	 on	 her	 cheek.	 The	 child	 smiled	 angelically.	 “He	 sees	 Krishna
everywhere.	He	has	talent	and	sings	well.	On	good	days,	people	flock	to	hear	him
and	the	room	is	stacked	with	presents	in	cash	and	kind.	Anyone	else	would	have
become	rich	by	now.	But	he	says	the	gifts	are	not	his,	but	his	God’s,	and	he	has	no
claim	on	them.	Whatever	he	earns,	he	gives	away	the	same	day.	He	considers	it	an
affront	to	his	God	to	believe	in	the	future	and	save	for	it.	He	says	that	he	who	has
made	us	will	provide.	By	the	evening,	everything	is	dispersed	to	whoever	comes
to	 our	 gate.	 All	 kinds	 of	 lazy	 men,	 beggars,	 saints,	 noblemen,	 women,	 and
charlatans,	 flock	 here	 to	 get	 their	 share.	 He	 sees	 his	 Krishna	 in	 every	 soul	 and
does	not	care	if	his	family	 goes	hungry.	This	is	my	fate	–	to	see	my	children	go
hungry	while	my	husband	feeds	strangers	and	thieves…”	She	stopped	suddenly.
“Mother,	forgive	me.	I	came	to	loot	you.”	Jara	saw	the	little	girl’s	thumb	go	into
her	mouth	and	the	mother	tenderly	kiss	her.	The	food	rumbled	in	his	stomach.	He
saw	 that	 a	 puddle	 had	 formed	 on	 the	 kitchen	 floor	 from	 the	 dripping	 hole	 in	 the
roof	 through	 which	 he	 had	 entered.	 They	 could	 hear	 the	 Brahmin	 chanting	 his
God’s	name	from	the	other	room.	Jara’s	eyes	met	those	of	the	woman.	He	felt	like
weeping.	“Mother,	you	will	not	go	hungry	tonight.	I	will	come	with	food,”	he	said,
not	knowing	what	else	to	say.	The	woman	just	smiled.	The	girl	had	slipped	into
peaceful	slumber.
Jara	hesitated	a	moment	longer	and	then	turned	on	his	heel	and	walked	out	into	the
wet	night.	The	streetlights	had	died	long	ago	in	the	rain	and	it	was	dark	and	damp
in	 the	 streets.	 Except	 for	 the	 gurgling	 of	 the	 storm	 water	 drains,	 the	 night	 was
silent.	 He	 did	 not	 know	 where	 he	 could	 get	 food	 at	 this	 time	 of	 night.	 He	 kept
wondering	what	made	people	so	crazy	that	they	gave	away	everything.	Earlier,	he
was	 used	 to	 men	 beating	 him	 up	 if	 he	 asked	 for	 food.	 Now	 he	 had	 become	 the
person	beating	others	up.	The	lashes	he	had	suffered	from	the	temple	Priest	still
hurt,	 at	 least	 in	 his	 mind.	 He	 did	 not	 understand	 the	 world.	 Life	 confused	 the

ignorant	Nishada.	Could	people	be	so	savage,	yet	so	kind	at	the	same	time?	It	was
easy	and	convenient	to	believe	that	those	who	were	different	were	evil.	He	had
developed	 a	 deep	 hatred	 for	 all	 Brahmins	 after	 the	 incident	 in	 the	 temple.	 But
crazy	men	like	the	singer	tonight,	shook	the	foundations	of	his	hatred	and	confused
him.	He	kept	walking	aimlessly.
Jara	saw	a	butcher’s	shop	with	a	ram	tied	to	the	leg	of	a	charpoy	standing	in	the
thatched	verandah	in	front	of	it.	The	shop	was	closed	and	the	butcher	was	snoring
loudly	on	the	charpoy.	Here	was	food!	‘I	could	repay	my	debt	to	the	mad	Brahmin
and	be	done	with	all	these	mushy	feelings,’	thought	the	Nishada.	He	felt	indebted
to	the	mad	man	and	feared	he	would	lose	the	ego	and	hatred	he	had	accumulated
over	 the	 years.	 He	 wanted	 to	 return	 to	 the	 world	 of	 crime	 and	 adventure.	 Jara
untied	 the	 ram	 and	 walked	 away.	 It	 took	 him	 a	 while	 to	 locate	 the	 house	 but	 he
eventually	 walked	 through	 the	 front	 gate	 with	 a	 spring	 in	 his	 step.	 He	 was	 the
giver	 now	 and	 not	 a	 sneaking	 thief.	 A	 strange	 sensation	 of	 happiness	 filled	 his
heart.	 The	 first	 understanding	 of	 the	 joy	 of	 giving	 entered	 his	 dark	 heart	 and	 the
Brahmin	who	gave	away	everything	began	to	seem	less	crazy.
Jara	knocked	on	the	door	and	the	Brahmin	opened	it.	Jara’s	dark	face	lit	with	joy
and	pride.	He	pulled	the	struggling	ram	closer	to	him	and	said,	“Swami,	here	is	a
gift.	You	can	eat	him	for	the	next	few	days.	I	will	feed	you	again	after	that.”	Jara
looked	at	the	Brahmin’s	wife	for	approval	but	she	just	shook	her	head	sadly.
“Krishna,	you	are	back.	You	are	so	kind	to	me.	Your	mischief	knows	no	bounds.
Don’t	 test	 me	 like	 this.”	 The	 Brahmin	 spoke	 as	 if	 in	 a	 trance.	 He	 knelt	 and
caressed	the	ram’s	face.	The	animal	stood	still,	as	if	sensing	the	kindness	in	the
gesture.	 Then	 the	 Brahmin	 stood	 up	 and	 walked	 into	 the	 darkness	 behind	 the
house.
“Mother…	won’t	you	accept	my	gift?”	Jara	felt	anger	rising	within	him.	He	knew
why	they	would	not	take	his	offering.	The	woman	just	shook	her	head	and	looked
at	 her	 sleeping	 children.	 “Is	 it	 because	 I	 am	 an	 Untouchable	 that	 you	 will	 not
accept	 my	 gift?”	 Jara	 asked	 bitterly,	 tasting	 the	 familiar	 bile	 in	 his	 mouth	 as	 he
uttered	the	words.	He	averted	his	eyes.	He	could	not	face	her.
“No,	 my	 son,”	 the	 woman	 answered	 softly.	 “He	 believes	 that	 every	 living	 thing
has	 a	 right	 to	 live,	 until	 God	 calls	 it	 back	 to	 his	 abode.	 He	 cannot	 approve	 of
killing	anything	for	the	sake	of	food	or	pleasure.	Your	present	is	one	more	mouth

to	feed.	That	is	all.”
The	Brahmin	returned	with	some	grass	and	put	it	in	front	of	the	ram.	He	looked	at
the	creature	eating	peacefully.	Jara	could	not	stand	it	anymore.	It	was	killing	him.
He	 hated	 the	 Brahmin.	 Unless	 he	 was	 able	 to	 repay	 this	 debt,	 he	 would	 never
escape	from	this	guilt	and	hatred.	He	turned	and	ran	wildly	into	the	night.
When	 he	 returned	 once	 more,	 with	 a	 sack	 of	 rice	 stolen	 from	 a	 shop,	 the	 house
was	burning.	Some	people	were	standing	in	the	street,	watching.	With	a	primitive
yell,	 the	 Nishada	 threw	 the	 sack	 of	 rice	 to	 the	 ground	 and	 ran	 into	 the	 inferno.
People	were	shocked	to	see	a	dark	man	running	into	the	raging	flames.	Before	they
could	stop	him,	he	had	jumped	into	the	burning	house.	Frantically,	he	searched	for
the	Brahmin	and	his	family	inside.	A	beam	fell	and	almost	pinned	Jara	beneath.	He
screamed	 in	 rage	 and	 tried	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 fire	 raging	 on	 all	 sides.	 Someone
pulled	 him	 out	 and	 tried	 to	 put	 out	 the	 flames	 licking	 the	 right	 side	 of	 his	 body.
They	rolled	him	on	the	ground	and	poured	water	over	him.	When	they	were	sure
he	was	out	of	danger,	they	turned	to	search	for	the	victims	inside	the	house.
Jara	lay	on	the	ground	moaning.	When	they	brought	out	the	charred	bodies	one	by
one,	he	could	not	say	a	word.	They	were	all	dead	–	little	Bhavani,	the	twins,	the
woman	he	had	called	mother,	the	crazy	Brahmin,	and	even	the	ram.	He	remained
frozen	and	mute,	even	when	they	moved	him	to	a	public	hospital	and	dressed	his
wounds,	leaving	him	to	live	or	die	in	the	indifference	of	the	free	ward.
It	 took	 him	 six	 months	 to	 recover.	 The	 physicians	 did	 not	 know	 his	 name	 and
called	him	Golden	Mongoose.	The	name	was	puzzling	to	the	dark	Nishada	until	he
saw	 his	 reflection	 in	 a	 broken	 piece	 of	 mirror	 someone	 had	 thrown	 into	 the
hospital	garbage.	By	that	time,	his	burns	had	almost	healed.	But	he	was	shocked	to
see	 his	 face	 and	 body.	 His	 left	 side	 retained	 its	 unblemished,	 smooth	 dark	 skin.
His	 right	 side	 was	 puckered	 and	 had	 a	 dirty	 golden	 hue.	 With	 his	 face	 partially
burned	away,	his	teeth	were	visible	on	the	right	side	of	his	face	where	the	lips	had
shrunk.	He	understood	at	last	the	reason	for	his	nickname.	He	looked	hideous.	But
Jara	did	not	cry.	His	tears	had	dried	long	ago.	He	threw	away	the	mirror	with	a
shrug	and	walked	back	to	his	sickbed.	He	had	no	use	for	reflections.
***

They	threw	him	out	of	the	hospital	once	they	were	confident	he	would	survive	–	if

living	a	beggar’s	life	could	be	called	surviving.	He	later	learnt	that	Daya	and	his
gang	had	decided	to	check	what	had	happened	to	him	on	their	way	back	that	night
and	 barged	 into	 the	 Brahmin’s	 house	 while	 he	 had	 gone	 in	 search	 of	 food.	 The
Brahmin’s	craziness	had	driven	Daya	mad	and	he	had	killed	the	singer	in	anger.
Then	he	had	no	choice	but	to	murder	everyone	in	the	house,	lest	there	be	witnesses
to	the	murder.	It	sounded	so	simple	and	routine.	The	gang	burned	down	the	house
before	escaping	so	no	proof	remained	of	their	deed.	Daya	had	felt	regret	for	a	day
or	two	but	soon	recovered.	His	imitation	of	the	Brahmin’s	crazy	talk	was	a	hit	at
their	booze	parties.	Durjaya	invited	Jara	back	into	the	gang	through	a	messenger,
but	Jara	refused.	The	beast	in	him	had	died	in	the	fire.	He	felt	as	crazy	as	the	dead
Brahmin.	It	did	not	matter	to	him	that	the	Brahmin’s	God	had	not	saved	him	from
the	thugs.	He	became	possessed	and	a	new	Jara	was	born	–	one	who	was	a	total
misfit	in	the	world.
When	Jara	was	able	to	walk	a	little	and	had	saved	some	coins	earned	by	begging,
he	went	to	see	Kripa.	He	went	at	night,	after	the	temple	had	closed,	to	avoid	any
angry	Priests.	He	wished	to	ask	Kripa	for	forgiveness,	for	stealing	his	money	so
long	ago.	When	Jara	reached	the	Banyan	tree,	Kripa	was	fast	asleep.	Jara	called
to	him.	When	the	Guru	did	not	stir,	Jara	shook	his	shoulder.	Kripa	awoke	with	a
curse	 on	 his	 lips;	 looked	 at	 Jara’s	 hideous	 face,	 and	 drew	 back	 in	 alarm.	 Then
recognition	dawned	and	he	smiled.
“Swami,	I	made	a	grave	mistake	years	ago.	Here	is	the	money	I	stole	from	you.
Forgive	me.”	Jara	felt	relieved	of	a	great	weight.
“Ha	ha…	you	did	not	steal.	I	stole	from	a	fool	by	threatening	him	with	my	sacred
thread.	You	were	smart	to	steal	the	money	and	get	away	from	me.	I	cursed	you	for
an	hour	and	then	I	was	happy	for	you.	I	knew	you	would	survive	when	I	found	the
money	 missing.	 You	 were	 suited	 to	 this	 world.	 Now	 I	 am	 worried.	 What	 makes
you	think	you	can	survive	as	a	saint	in	this	world,	unless	you	make	it	your	business
to	exploit	the	gullible	and	greedy?”
Jara	 did	 not	 answer	 because	 he	 did	 not	 understand	 the	 import	 of	 Kripa’s
reasoning.	But	he	pleaded	with	him	to	take	the	money	until	the	Brahmin	became
angry	 and	 cursed	 him	 to	 get	 out	 and	 let	 him	 sleep.	 Kripa	 added	 some	 choice
expletives	about	saints	and	holy	men	before	returning	to	his	slumber.
The	 same	 day,	 Jara	 witnessed	 Shakuni	 pushing	 Bhima	 into	 the	 river.	 He	 was

hauled	before	the	sabha	in	Prince	Suyodhana’s	trial	for	the	murder	of	his	cousin.
Even	though	Jara	was	intimidated	by	the	splendour	of	the	palace,	the	King,	and	the
regal-looking	nobleman	who	barked	at	him	to	stand	straight	and	speak	like	a	man,
he	was	glad	he	had	had	a	hand	in	Prince	Suyodhana	being	freed	of	the	charge.	He
took	the	beatings	he	later	received	from	the	guards	as	a	test	from	God.	It	was	all
Krishna’s	leela,	thought	the	Nishada,	as	his	frail	body	lay	bruised	and	broken.
Jara	asked	many	people	where	Krishna	was	to	be	found.	Some	told	him	Krishna
was	a	Yadava	Prince	from	Dwaraka,	who	had	become	an	avatar	because	of	his
wisdom	and	ability	to	create	things	from	thin	air.	Others	said	it	was	all	a	farce	and
that	 Krishna	 had	 no	 such	 powers,	 that	 he	 was	 just	 another	 Prince	 playing	 dirty
politics.	Jara	became	angry	when	he	heard	these	opinions.	Krishna	was	the	dead
Brahmin’s	God.	He	could	not	have	been	wrong.	With	a	passion	that	bordered	on
insanity,	 the	 Untouchable	 believed	 in	 Krishna’s	 infinite	 compassion	 and
omnipotent	 power.	 Every	 moment	 was	 spent	 in	 His	 worship	 and	 every	 act	 was
given	 as	 an	 offering.	 Soon	 a	 new	 voice	 was	 heard	 amidst	 the	 cacophony	 of	 the
narrow	 lanes	 of	 Hastinapura.	 The	 harsh	 lives	 of	 the	 poor	 were	 softened	 by	 the
sweet	voice	of	Jara	singing	his	God’s	praises.
It	 was	 this	 Jara	 that	 the	 blind	 dog	 took	 asylum	 with.	 Guru	 Drona	 passed	 them,
sleeping	huddled	together,	on	his	way	back	after	claiming	the	thumb	and	dreams	of
another	 Nishada.	 The	 next	 morning,	 the	 dog	 licked	 Jara	 awake.	 The	 soft	 tongue
caressing	 his	 dirty	 face	 felt	 good.	 It	 was	 a	 blessing	 to	 be	 alive	 in	 this	 beautiful
world.	Jara	kissed	the	earth,	as	was	his	habit,	and	thanked	Krishna	for	his	mercy
and	kindness.	He	sang	of	His	wisdom,	His	maya,	His	mischief,	and	His	love.	The
blind	dog,	its	eyes	encrusted	with	dried	blood,	listened	in	rapt	attention,	wagging
its	tail.	A	few	pedestrians	threw	coins	onto	the	rag	spread	before	the	beggar.
By	afternoon,	a	whim	seized	Jara.	He	wanted	to	name	his	new	pet.	He	thought	of
many	names,	but	only	one	struck	him	as	good	enough.	He	had	heard	the	word	used
by	many	holy	men.	It	was	used	so	casually	that	it	had	become	commonplace.	The
Untouchable	did	not	know	its	real	meaning,	but	that	did	not	matter,	it	was	his	dog
and	 it	 was	 a	 free	 country.	 He	 could	 call	 it	 whatever	 he	 wanted.	 Jara	 lifted	 the
blind	puppy	to	the	sun	and	it	whined.	Like	a	father	at	the	naamkaran	ceremony,	he
placed	 the	 puppy	 in	 his	 lap.	 “Dharma,	 Dharma,	 Dharma,”	 Jara	 whispered	 three
times	into	the	dog’s	ear.
The	ignorant	beggar	had	unwittingly	chosen	a	curious	name	for	the	dog	blinded	by

Arjuna	and	Ekalavya.	Dharma,	the	blind	street	dog,	wagged	its	tail	in	happiness	as
the	 Untouchable	 caressed	 its	 head	 affectionately.	 Around	 them,	 life	 went	 on
without	caring	a	whit,	on	the	streets	of	India.

16	RETURN	OF	THE	SUTA
THE	SHIP	REACHED	DWARAKA	on	a	misty	morning.	Karna	thanked	the	Greek	Captain,

who	reiterated	his	offer	to	take	him	to	his	own	country.	From	the	deck	where	they
stood,	the	golden	domes	of	Balarama’s	palace	and	the	city’s	temple	spires	were
clearly	 visible.	Karna	 smiled	at	 the	 foreigner	 and	 shook	 his	 head.	 A	 close	 bond
had	developed	between	the	Suta	and	the	Yavana.	Karna	tried	to	pay	for	his	voyage
with	 some	 of	 the	 money	 left	 from	 the	 prizes	 he	 had	 won	 with	 the	 Dharmaveera
title,	 but	 the	 Captain	 refused,	 saying	 he	 would	 be	 betraying	 the	 pride	 of	 his
motherland	if	he	charged	a	warrior	like	Karna.	A	few	days	before,	under	a	starsprinkled	sky,	on	a	calm	sea,	with	the	ship	just	an	insignificant	speck	in	the	vast
universe,	 Karna	 had	 told	 the	 Greek	 his	 story	 of	 struggle,	 ambition,	 achievement,
and	the	curse	of	his	Guru.	For	some	inexplicable	reason,	it	had	moved	the	mlecha
to	tears.
The	 Captain	 accompanied	 Karna	 to	 the	 dockyard	 and	 people	 watched	 with
curiosity	as	the	yellow-haired	barbarian	and	the	tall	Indian,	dressed	in	barbarian
clothes,	hugged	each	other.	They	knew	they	would	never	see	each	other	again	and
that	 made	 the	 friendship	 feel	 more	 real	 and	 eternal.	 The	 Captain	 watched	 the
Indian	fall	on	his	knees	and	kiss	the	ground	and	a	great	hatred	for	Karna’s	country
filled	the	Yavana’s	mind.	Despite	all	its	wonderful	temples	and	great	cities,	India
could	not	withstand	an	invading	power	for	long	if	it	continued	to	treat	its	men	and
women	of	talent	like	dirt	just	for	being	born	into	the	wrong	caste.	The	Supervisor
of	 Customs	 came	 to	 meet	 the	 Captain,	 cutting	 short	 his	 fantastic	 dreams	 of
invading	India,	and	he	soon	became	mired	in	the	complex	world	of	commerce.
Karna	had	only	his	bow	and	quiver	of	arrows,	the	whip-like	sword	urumi,	which
he	 wore	 as	 a	 belt,	 and	 some	 borrowed	 clothes	 from	 the	 Captain,	 as	 his	 only
possessions.	The	future	looked	uncertain	and	frightening.	Perhaps	he	should	try	to
meet	the	Yadava	leader	and	ask	for	employment,	he	thought,	though	his	heart	lay	in
Hastinapura.	He	yearned	to	see	his	parents	and	impress	his	former	playmates	with
the	skills	he	had	acquired.	He	wanted	to	jump	into	the	cold	waters	of	the	Ganga
and	 swim	 against	 her	 powerful	 currents.	 It	 had	 been	 unbelievably	 beautiful
floating	in	the	tamely	flowing	Poorna	at	Muzaris,	when	the	moon	played	hide-and-

seek	behind	the	coconut	palms,	and	such	nights	were	close	to	Karna’s	heart,	but	he
always	 missed	 the	 brute	 force	 of	 the	 Ganga.	 The	 swift-flowing	 waters	 from	 the
Himalayas	and	the	reflection	of	the	lights	of	the	many	temples	and	palaces	on	her
banks,	 was	 an	 enchanted	 world	 no	 other	 river	 in	 the	 world	 could	 match.	 The
Ganga	 had	 one	 thing	 that	 other	 rivers	 could	 not	 offer	 Karna	 –	 the	 flavour	 of	 his
childhood	and	the	fragrance	of	nostalgia.	He	longed	for	his	home.
Karna	 touched	 his	 heart	 and	 his	 fingers	 rubbed	 against	 the	 smoothness	 of	 his
armour,	bringing	back	a	flood	of	memories.	The	armour	had	been	a	gift	from	the
King	of	Kalinga,	when	he	had	visited	Parashurama.	Impressed	by	Karna’s	talent,
the	 King	 had	 given	 him	 the	 exquisite	 armour,	 forged	 by	 his	 best	 blacksmiths,
saying	 it	 was	 a	 gift	 from	 Surya,	 the	 patron	 God	 of	 Kalinga.	 In	 the	 ancient	 Sun
Temple,	blacksmiths	had	made	the	masterpiece,	working	for	seven	long	years	to
create	the	lightest	and	strongest	body	armour.	Learned	Priests	then	placed	it	at	the
feet	of	the	Sun	God	and	worshipped	it	every	day.	The	armour	Karna	wore	was	of
unknown	 antiquity.	 The	 tradition	 was	 to	 bestow	 the	 armour	 upon	 a	 warrior	 who
would	safeguard	dharma	and	always	be	righteous.	Every	year,	during	the	annual
Surya	 festival,	 astrologers	 consulted	 the	 stars	 to	 determine	 whom	 the	 God	 was
pleased	to	bestow	the	armour	upon.	For	many	years,	the	God	had	been	silent	and
the	 Priests	 had	 put	 the	 armour	 reverently	 back	 to	 the	 feet	 of	 the	 deity.	 Such	 a
warrior	 had	 yet	 to	 be	 born.	 Generations	 of	 Kalinga	 Kings	 fervently	 wished	 they
would	be	the	ones	chosen	to	present	the	armour	to	such	a	warrior.
The	Sun	God	had	blessed	the	present	King	of	Kalinga,	as	the	stars	now	pointed	to
such	a	warrior.	The	mighty	King	had	fallen	at	the	feet	of	the	twenty-two-year-old,
while	Guru	Parashurama	looked	at	his	most	outstanding	disciple	with	pride.	The
Guru	 had	said	 the	Sun	 God	had	 blessed	 the	Kalinga	King	indeed,	 as	 Karna	 was
not	 just	 a	 great	 warrior	 but	 also	 a	 learned	 Brahmin.	 The	 Court	 of	 Muzaris	 had
exploded	in	applause	while	Karna	squirmed	within.	The	King	was	reverential	and
he	 had	 insisted	 Karna	 bless	 him	 every	 morning	 until	 he	 left	 the	 Chera	 kingdom.
Now	 the	 King	 of	 Kalinga	 was	 one	 of	 his	 many	 foes	 and	 wanted	 his	 head.	 How
could	such	a	reverential	relationship	be	thus	easily	broken	just	because	he	was	a
Suta?	 Was	 it	 not	 defying	 the	 wish	 of	 his	 patron	 God,	 Surya,	 wondered	 Karna	 in
deep	sadness.
Immersed	in	his	thoughts,	Karna	reached	the	palace	gates.	He	cursed	himself	for
not	 having	 purchased	 some	 proper	 clothes.	 He	 was	 still	 wearing	 the	 Captain’s
borrowed	 clothes,	 which	 itched	 in	 many	 places.	 The	 guards	 looked	 at	 him	 with

suspicion	 and	 curiosity.	 They	 had	 never	 seen	 a	 fellow	 countryman	 wearing	 such
clothes.	 Karna	 asked	 for	 a	 palm	 leaf	 at	 the	 Security	 Chief’s	 office.	 Scribbling
‘Vasusena’	on	it,	he	asked	for	it	to	be	delivered	to	the	Yadava	Chief.	He	put	down
two	 coins	 as	 a	 bribe	 but	 the	 Security	 Chief	 laughed	 and	 returned	 them	 politely.
Karna	 was	 pleasantly	 surprised.	 He	 waited	 under	 the	 shade	 of	 a	 tamarind	 tree
outside.	He	looked	around	and	saw	the	city	had	prospered	greatly	in	the	last	eight
years.	Although	he	had	not	been	here	before,	he	had	heard	it	had	been	a	wasteland
where	nothing	grew.	He	had	also	seen	a	miniature	model	of	it	in	Balarama’s	room,
and	 the	 passion	 in	 the	 Yadava	 leader’s	 eyes,	 which	 energized	 everyone	 around
him.	He	could	easily	imagine	him	working	hard	to	raise	this	city	up	from	nothing.
His	admiration	for	Balarama	rose	still	higher.
Dwaraka	 had	 an	 air	 of	 freshness	 and	 energy.	 There	 were	 shining	 mansions	 and
swanky	 shops;	 curiously	 shaped	 chariots,	 with	 all	 manner	 of	 decorations	 and
trappings,	 whizzing	past	in	the	streets;	teenagers	prancing	around	on	 horses;	and
elephants	lumbering	past	carrying	noblemen	and	women,	leaving	the	sweet	chimes
of	 bells	 behind	 them.	 The	 city	 was	 completely	 unlike	 the	 mad	 chaos	 of
Hastinapura	or	the	exotic	cosmopolitism	of	Muzaris.	It	was	not	yet	the	largest	city
in	India	but	it	was	definitely	on	its	way.	It	lacked	the	art	and	culture	of	Kashi	or
Kanchipuram	and	the	glitter	of	Mathura,	but	compensated	for	it	with	the	vigour	of
youth.	Balarama	was	working	his	magic.	He	had	built	a	city	from	nothing.	He	was
also	showing	the	world	that	he	could	build	a	city	that	followed	rules	–	with	clean
streets,	 proper	 drains,	 hygienic	 eating-places,	 tree-lined	 avenues,	 and	 tiled
footpaths.	 Balarama	 was	 showing	 everyone	 that	 all	 this	 was	 possible	 here	 and
now.
A	 guard	 broke	 into	 Karna’s	 reverie.	 He	 bowed	 low	 and	 invited	 him	 to	 follow.
Karna	was	escorted	to	the	entrance	of	Balarama’s	chamber,	where	he	hesitated	a
moment,	 wondering	 how	 the	 Yadava	 leader	 would	 receive	 him.	 Then	 he	 took	 a
deep	 breath	 and	 entered.	 Balarama	 looked	 older.	 His	 hair	 had	 begun	 to	 recede,
making	 his	 forehead	 look	 larger.	 He	 sat	 poring	 over	 the	 bundles	 of	 manuscripts
piled	on	his	table.	What	struck	Karna	immediately	was	the	utter	simplicity	of	his
white	 attire.	 With	 a	 white	 cotton	 dhoti	 and	 a	 shawl	 thrown	 loosely	 over	 his
shoulders	as	his	only	adornment,	the	great	leader	of	the	Yadavas	looked	like	any
of	his	people	 –	except	for	the	magnetism	that	emanated	from	him	like	an	unseen
force.	Karna	thought	that	without	the	gold	ornaments,	sparkling	diamonds	or	pearl
necklaces	 he	 had	 come	 to	 associate	 with	 the	 rich	 Kings	 of	 the	 Southern

Confederate,	 Balarama	 looked	almost	 naked.	 Karna	 stood,	 waiting	 patiently	 for
Balarama	to	raise	his	head	and	say	something.	He	felt	embarrassed	and	irritated,
but	hoped	this	did	not	show	on	his	face.	He	had	expected	a	warmer	reception	from
his	mentor.
After	 what	 seemed	 an	 eon,	 Balarama	 raised	 his	 head	 from	 the	 pile	 of	 work	 and
smiled	 at	 Karna,	 who	 relaxed	 a	 little.	 “By	 Shiva,	 you	 have	 grown	 so	 tall	 and
handsome!	My	mind	still	carried	the	image	of	the	young	boy	who	stood	in	front	of
me	 years	 ago	 and	 spoke	 of	 his	 dreams.	 Karna,	 how	 happy	 I	 am	 to	 see	 you!”
Balarama	 rushed	 to	 embrace	 the	 stiff	 young	 man.	 “You	 are	 still	 a	 sentimental
rascal.	 I	 knew	 you	 had	 come	 and	 were	 standing	 there	 waiting	 for	 me	 to	 say
something.	I	was	just	seeing	whether	you	had	changed.	I	am	happy	to	see	you	have
not.	You	still	have	the	emotions	of	a	human	being.	I	was	afraid	your	training	would
have	made	you	lose	your	goodness	of	heart	and	turned	you	into	a	calculating	and
manipulative	 man,	 hungry	 for	 worldly	 success.	 But	 your	 face	 reflects	 your
goodness	and	I	am	happy,	Karna.”
Karna	 cursed	 himself.	 Did	 his	 face	 really	 show	 whatever	 he	 thought?	 Balarama
led	him	to	the	couch	in	the	corner	and	sat	down	without	letting	loose	his	grip	on
Karna’s	wrist.	He	touched	the	armour	and	said	admiringly,	“It	looks	great	on	you.
Such	fine	workmanship!	Where	did	you	get	it?”
These	words	broke	through	Karna’s	reticence.	He	recounted	his	adventures	in	the
South	and	talked	of	the	glittering	Asura	kingdoms	and	their	proud	Kings.	He	spoke
of	 the	 horrible	 caste	 system,	 which	 was	 many	 times	 more	 rigid	 than	 in
Hastinapura,	 and	 the	 dogmatic	 men	 who	 regulated	 it.	 He	 spoke	 of	 the	 miserable
life	 of	 the	 Pariahs	 and	 other	 Untouchables,	 alongside	 the	 life	 of	 leisure	 of	 the
richer	 classes.	 He	 described	 the	 great	 dance	 forms	 and	 magnificent	 temples,	 the
architecture,	 engineering	 skills,	 and	 music,	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate,	 and	 the
lovely	lands	that	had	been	blessed	by	nature’s	bounty.	But	when	he	mentioned	his
enigmatic	 Guru,	 Parashurama,	 he	 choked.	 Karna	 no	 longer	 felt	 like	 a	 proud
warrior,	but	a	young	boy	scolded	by	his	father	for	no	fault	of	his.
Balarama	watched	Karna	and	squeezed	his	shoulder	when	the	young	man	stopped
speaking.	 He	 understood	 the	 emotions	 Karna	 was	 trying	 to	 keep	 hidden.	 “What
happened	 then?	 Were	 you	 able	 to	 make	 a	 good	 impression	 on	 him?”	 Balarama
asked	softly.

“I…	he…	he	was	like	a	father	to	me,	until…”	Karna	stopped	short	and	turned	his
head	away.	He	stood	up	and	walked	to	the	window.	He	did	not	want	Balarama	to
see	his	tears.	‘Am	I	a	woman	who	cries	over	such	silly	things?’	he	thought.	In	the
garden	 outside,	 a	 beautiful	 young	 girl	 sat	 on	 a	 park	 bench,	 singing	 a	 melodious
song.	A	few	of	her	friends	sat	listening	with	rapt	attention	as	her	mellifluous	voice
caressed	 the	 flowers	 and	 added	 a	 special	 fragrance	 to	 the	 breeze.	 Her	 voice
soothed	his	mind	and	stirred	feelings	of	some	unimaginable	pleasure.
“Did	he	discover	who	you	were?”
Karna	turned	quickly,	his	eyes	full	of	the	anguish	in	his	soul.	He	told	Balarama	his
story	–	from	the	day	he	left	the	shores	of	Prabhasa	as	a	young	boy,	to	winning	the
coveted	 title	 of	 Dharmaveera.	 But	 when	 he	 narrated	 the	 curse	 of	 his	 Guru,	 his
voice	dropped	almost	to	a	whisper.	“I	am	a	fugitive	now,	with	all	the	Kings	of	the
Southern	 Confederate	 baying	 for	 my	 blood.	 They	 want	 my	 head	 for	 making
Parashurama	look	a	fool.	I	do	not	know	what	happened	to	my	Guru.	I	cheated	them
and	perhaps	I	deserve	to	be	punished.”	He	smiled	at	Balarama	ruefully.
“I	 knew	 something	 had	 happened	 to	 you	 since	 my	 spies	 inform	 me	 that	 Guru
Parashurama	is	still	unconscious	and	that	a	warrior	from	the	North,	who	was	his
disciple,	did	something	terrible	to	him.	I	had	given	you	up	for	dead	until	I	got	a
message	 from	 the	 King	 of	 Gokarna.”	 Balarama	 went	 to	 his	 desk.	 Taking	 a	 palm
leaf	from	it,	he	handed	it	to	Karna,	whose	face	darkened	as	he	read.
“Karna,	 I	 would	 love	 to	 have	 you	 stay	 here,	 but	 things	 are	 not	 as	 they	 seem	 in
Dwaraka.	 I	 am	 fighting	 a	 tough	 battle	 with	 the	 conservatives	 here.	 I	 have	 to
compromise	on	certain	things	to	prevent	civil	war.	I	fear	that	one	day	we	Yadavas
are	 going	 to	 kill	 each	 other	 and	 put	 an	 end	 to	 all	 I	 have	 been	 working	 for.	 Rest
today	and	start	early	tomorrow	for	Hastinapura.	Bhishma	has	things	under	control
there	I	hope.	Moreover,	Graduation	Day	for	the	students	of	Guru	Drona	is	only	a
month	 away,	 and	 you	 can	 perhaps	 apply	 for	 an	 Officer’s	 post	 with	 Prince
Suyodhana.	 As	 you	 know,	 once	 graduation	 is	 over,	 the	 Prince	 comes	 of	 age	 and
gains	some	independence	in	taking	decisions	in	the	affairs	of	State.	I	will	write	a
letter	 to	 him,	 recommending	 an	 Officer’s	 post	 for	 you…	 not	 that	 you	 need	 any
recommendation,”	said	Balarama	smiling.
Karna	looked	away	to	the	garden.	The	girl	had	left	and	except	for	a	few	butterflies
and	 sparrows,	 it	 was	 empty.	 His	 mind	 was	 in	 turmoil.	 The	 future	 looked	 bleak

indeed.	The	King	of	Gokarna’s	message	was	clear.	Karna	was	a	wanted	man.	The
Kings	 of	 the	 northern	 kingdoms,	 if	 they	 found	 him,	 were	 to	 capture	 him	 dead	 or
alive,	and	hand	him	over	to	the	Confederate.	Danger	lurked	everywhere,	and	like
a	 fool,	 he	 was	 roaming	 about	 the	 streets	 of	 Dwaraka,	 blissfully	 unaware.	 An
arrow	 from	 someone	 hiding	 behind	 a	 tree	 or	 pillar	 could	 finish	 off	 the	 Shudra
Dharmaveera	in	an	instant.
“Namaste,	brother.”
Karna’s	stomach	knotted	on	hearing	the	familiar	voice.	He	turned	to	see	his	hated
foe	standing	at	the	door.
“Yes,	 Krishna?	 Have	 all	 the	 arrangements	 for	 the	 puja	 been	 made?”	 Balarama
tried	to	sound	casual.	With	his	yellow	silken	dhoti,	a	peacock	feather	in	his	curly
hair,	glittering	ornaments	all	over	his	body,	his	flute	tucked	into	his	waistband,	and
a	garland	of	flowers	around	his	neck,	Krishna	looked	divine.	There	could	not	have
been	a	greater	contrast	than	the	simple	white	cotton	Balarama	wore	and	Krishna’s
finery.	 Karna	 could	 not	 help	 noticing	 how	 handsome	 the	 younger	 Yadava	 Prince
looked.
“Namaste,”	Krishna	said	to	Karna	with	a	smile.	“I	seem	to	know	this	young	man
from	somewhere,	brother.”
“He	is	Vasusena	Karna	of	Hastinapura,	an	old	friend	of	mine.	You	cannot	find	a
better	 archer	 in	 all	 of	 India,”	 Balarama	 replied	 proudly,	 while	 Karna	 looked
bashful	at	this	sudden	praise.
“Ah!	Now	I	remember	him.	He	is	that	Suta	boy	who	went	to	the	South	to	become	a
warrior.	 He	 may	 be	 your	 friend	 brother,	 but	 his	 former	 supporters	 at	 the
Confederate	are	now	on	the	lookout	for	him.	What	is	he	doing	here?	Do	you	want
the	 Confederate	 armies	 to	 descend	 upon	 Dwaraka	 and	 reduce	 our	 city	 to	 dust?
Also,	 I	 think	 you	 forget	 Prince	 Arjuna,	 when	 you	 say	 Vasusena	 is	 the	 greatest
archer	in	the	land.”	Krishna	smiled.
Karna	 burned	 with	 anger	 at	 the	 insult.	 He	 knew	 the	 Yadava	 Prince	 was	 merely
trying	to	provoke	him	and	was	waiting	for	Karna	to	react.	That	would	have	been
good	enough	reason	to	order	his	arrest.	But	Karna	stood	in	silence.

“Krishna,	why	are	you	trying	to	pull	his	leg?	You	may	be	rest	assured	that	I	have
sufficient	influence	with	the	Kings	of	the	South.	They	would	not	dare	start	a	war
now.	We	are	strong	enough	to	defend	our	walled	city.	Please	leave	us	alone	now.	I
will	discuss	the	arrangements	for	the	puja	later,”	Balarama	said.
Krishna	kept	smiling	at	Karna.	“As	you	wish,	brother.	Do	ensure	our	people	are
protected	from	the	Confederate	armies.”	He	bowed	formally	to	Balarama,	folded
his	hands	in	 farewell	to	Karna,	and	 walked	out	of	the	room.	Karna	continued	to
see	the	frozen	smile	long	after	he	had	gone.
Balarama	turned	to	Karna,	a	frown	between	his	eyes.	“You	must	leave	Dwaraka.
Go	 to	 Hastinapura,	 and	 watch	 your	 back.	 Keep	 a	 low	 profile.	 There	 are	 many
forces	working	around	us.	Do	not	underestimate	Parashurama’s	power	and	reach.
It	 does	 not	 matter	 that	 he	 is	 lying	 unconscious	 somewhere	 in	 the	 South.	 Leave
Dwaraka	before	dawn.”
A	 chill	 went	 down	 Karna’s	 spine	 when	 he	 heard	 the	 weariness	 in	 the	 Yadava’s
voice.	 He	 wanted	 to	 ask	 him	 many	 things	 but	 before	 he	 could	 open	 his	 mouth,
Balarama	 called	 a	 servant	 and	 asked	 him	 to	 show	 Karna	 to	 his	 chamber.	 Karna
bowed	 and	 touched	 the	 Yadava	 leader’s	 feet	 before	 taking	 his	 leave.	 His	 mind
was	in	turmoil.	He	did	not	know	what	the	future	held.	The	only	thing	he	was	sure
of	 was	 that	 danger	 lurked	 at	 every	 turn.	 The	 spies	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate
could	 reach	 him	 anytime,	 anywhere.	 As	 he	 reached	 the	 guest	 chamber,	 he	 saw
Krishna	 standing	 with	 his	 arms	 crossed,	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 shadowy	 corridor.
Involuntarily,	Karna’s	hand	went	to	the	hidden	urumi	at	his	waist.	Krishna	did	not
miss	 the	 Suta’s	 action	 and	 his	 taunting	 laughter	 filled	 the	 empty	 corridor.	 Karna
quickly	 entered	 the	 chamber	 and	 stood	 with	 his	 back	 firmly	 pressed	 against	 the
closed	 door,	 thinking	 frantically	 about	 what	 to	 do.	 He	 locked	 the	 door	 and	 sat
down	on	the	couch	in	the	corner.	For	a	long	time	he	sat,	tensely	listening	for	any
footsteps	 or	 suspicious	 movements,	 until	 exhaustion	 finally	 claimed	 him	 and
dragged	him	into	a	dreamless	sleep.	The	palace	remained	eerily	silent.
A	soft	knock	on	the	door	woke	Karna	with	a	start.	It	was	dark.	He	had	slept	for	a
long	 time.	 He	 cautiously	 opened	 the	 door,	 keeping	 a	 firm	 grip	 on	 his	 sword.	 A
beautiful	 face	 looked	 back	 at	 him.	 Karna’s	 heart	 skipped	 a	 beat.	 The	 girl	 had
captivated	him	with	her	song	that	afternoon.	He	did	not	know	what	to	do.	Should
he	invite	her	in?	Was	it	improper	to	keep	her	standing	outside?

Her	red	lips	parted	in	a	pearly	smile	at	Karna’s	confusion.	“I	am	Subhadra,	your
friend’s	 sister,”	 she	 said,	 bringing	 her	 palms	 together	 in	 greeting.	 Karna	 bowed
and	stepped	out.	“Prince,	I	hear	you	are	going	to	Hastinapura	tomorrow.	Will	you
be	meeting	the	Crown	Prince	there?”	There	was	a	hint	of	bashfulness	in	her	voice.
“Devi,	I	am	no	Prince.	I	am	Karna,	a	charioteer’s	son.	But	it	is	true	I	am	going	to
my	hometown,”	Karna	replied	with	an	amused	smile.
“Oh,	I	thought	you	too,	were	a	Prince	of	Hastinapura...	never	mind,	can	you	pass
on	 a	 message	 to	 Suyodhana?”	 Subhadra	 asked,	 biting	 her	 lip	 at	 her	 mistake	 in
using	the	Crown	Prince’s	name	instead	of	the	honorific.
Karna	looked	at	her	as	she	lowered	her	eyes.	He	smiled	at	her	flushed	cheeks	and
teased,	“It	is	not	easy	for	commoners	like	me	to	meet	Princes	and	Kings.”
“Oh	you	must.	Just	mention	my	name	and	you	will	get	an	audience,”	Subhadra	told
him	blithely.	“Tell	him	I	will	be	there	for	the	Graduation	ceremony…	 and	that	I
miss	him.”
Karna	 looked	 at	 the	 twinkling	 eyes	 and	 the	 curly	 hair	 that	 flowed	 down	 to	 her
waist.	‘Lucky	bastard,’	he	thought.	His	mind	was	fluttering	like	a	trapped	butterfly.
Someone	 already	 had	 a	 claim	 on	 her	 and	 he	 should	 forget	 such	 thoughts.	 Karna
sighed	ruefully.	Such	was	the	luck	of	some	people	–	to	be	born	into	a	noble	house
and	be	loved	by	a	beautiful	Princess.
“Sister,”	 Karna	 addressed	 Subhadra,	 and	 felt	 immediately	 relieved	 by	 the
appellation,	“I	shall	try	to	pass	on	the	message	to	His	Excellency.”
“Thank	 you,”	 she	 said,	 bowing	 to	 him.	 She	 turned	 and	 disappeared	 into	 the
darkness	with	a	flurry	of	rustling	skirts	and	chiming	anklets.
Karna	gently	bolted	the	door.	A	little	of	her	sweet	fragrance	had	sneaked	into	the
room	and	his	thoughts	wandered	again	as	he	sat	by	the	open	window,	looking	at	a
smiling	moon	floating	among	the	clouds.	How	beautiful	life	was!	He	contemplated
Subhadra’s	 message.	 How	 was	 he	 going	 to	 get	 an	 audience	 with	 the	 Crown
Prince?	The	innocence	of	her	love	was	so	refreshing.	One	day,	perhaps	life	would
reward	 him	 with	 such	 a	 pure	 love.	 His	 thoughts	 drifted	 to	 his	 humble	 home	 and
poor	 parents.	 He	 felt	 guilty	 that	 he	 had	 not	 thought	 about	 them	 much	 in	 the	 long

years	of	his	absence.	There	had	been	a	new	world	to	conquer	and	an	exciting	life
to	be	lived.	They	were	so	far	away	and	he	was	chasing	his	dreams.	But	sitting	in	a
dark	room	in	Dwaraka,	the	small	hut	in	Hastinapura	did	not	seem	so	far	away	to
Karna.	 It	 could	 not	 have	 been	 easy	 for	 the	 old	 couple	 in	 his	 absence.	 He	 could
understand	them	better	now.	Living	in	the	same	house,	they	constantly	saw	the	bed
he	had	slept	in,	the	broken	toys	he	had	played	with,	the	dress	he	had	discarded,
and	would	have	thought	of	him	every	day.	Karna	missed	his	father’s	gentle	smile
and	his	mother’s	cooking,	the	touch	of	her	hand	on	his	head.	He	longed	for	home.
His	reverie	was	broken	by	the	sound	of	footsteps.	A	normal	man	would	not	have
heard	 them,	 but	 Karna	 was	 a	 warrior	 trained	 by	 the	 best	 Guru	 in	 India	 and	 his
body	sensed	danger	even	before	his	ear	heard	the	soft	sound	of	feet.	Someone	was
outside!	 He	 could	 feel	 it.	 Had	 someone	 pushed	 the	 door	 slightly	 to	 test	 its
strength?	It	might	have	been	nothing,	perhaps	just	the	wind,	but	not	a	leaf	stirred
outside.	Just	then,	the	moon	went	into	hiding	behind	a	dark	cloud	and	there	was	a
sudden	chill	in	the	air.
Karna	quietly	picked	up	his	small	bundle,	checked	his	weapons,	and	listened.	‘Am
I	 getting	 paranoid?’	 he	 wondered,	 as	 he	 walked	 on	 tiptoe	 towards	 the	 window.
Outside,	the	sky	was	cloudy.	Most	of	the	torches	around	the	palace	had	died	away.
Near	the	fort	gate,	a	flickering	torch	cast	its	reluctant	light	on	a	couple	of	dozing
guards.	Karna	weighed	his	options.	This	place	was	dangerous	and	it	was	best	to
get	out	of	Dwaraka	before	dawn.	The	journey	would	be	tricky	as	miles	of	jungle
and	 desert	 lay	 between	 here	 and	 Hastinapura.	 It	 was	 easy	 to	 get	 lost	 in	 the
intervening	 arid	 lands	 and	 ruins	 of	 ancient	 cities.	 He	 needed	 a	 horse.	 Going	 on
foot	was	out	of	the	question.	Graduation	Day	for	the	Princes	was	nearing	and	he
had	a	vague	plan	about	how	to	impress	the	powerful	people	and	gain	employment.
Perhaps	the	Yadava	leader	would	lend	him	a	horse.	It	was	still	dark.
This	time	it	was	unmistakable.	The	door	rattled	and	the	tip	of	a	knife	was	inserted
through	the	gap	between	the	door	and	the	doorframe.	Someone	was	trying	to	move
the	bolt.	Karna’s	heart	thudded	in	his	chest.	There	could	be	many	warriors	waiting
for	him	in	the	corridor.	‘Should	I	stay	and	fight	or	get	the	hell	out	of	here	before	it
is	too	late?’	Someone	kicked	the	door,	but	it	held.	Karna	grasped	his	possessions
and	jumped	out	of	the	window.	His	assailants	would	expect	him	to	make	a	dash
for	the	gate	or	hide	in	the	garden.	He	had	to	outwit	them,	so	he	perched	just	under
the	window,	saving	his	breath.

A	dark	face	peered	out	and	cursed.	“The	bloody	Suta	has	escaped!”	The	speaker
kicked	 over	 a	 table	 and	 the	 sound	 of	 shattering	 glass	 reverberated	 across	 the
palace.
“Bloody	 fool!	 Do	 you	 want	 to	 wake	 everyone?”	 snapped	 a	 voice.	 Silence
followed.
They	could	be	coming	any	moment	now.	Where	were	the	Royal	stables?	Was	it	the
faint	outline	of	a	roof	he	could	see	on	the	eastern	flank?	They	could	catch	him	any
moment.	Karna	ran	across	the	lawn,	half	expecting	an	arrow	to	pierce	his	throat.
He	touched	his	armour,	finding	comfort	in	its	heaviness	and	promise	of	protection.
Karna	 reached	 the	 stables,	 panting	 and	 out	 of	 breath.	 He	 could	 see	 four	 dark
figures	moving	through	the	palace	gardens,	searching	every	bush	and	tree.	In	the
faint	light	of	the	torch	at	the	gate,	their	shadows	had	grown	into	monsters	crawling
across	the	lawn.	The	horses	were	restless,	sensing	the	presence	of	a	stranger.	If
one	 of	 them	 neighed,	 it	 would	 attract	 the	 prowling	 men’s	 attention.	 Then	 there
would	be	no	option	but	to	fight;	to	kill	or	be	killed.
There	were	hundreds	of	fine	horses	in	the	stables.	Karna	quickly	assessed	each.
Finally,	he	found	the	black	one	he	wanted	and	went	up	to	it,	praying	it	would	not
neigh.	He	approached	cautiously,	speaking	gently	to	calm	it	down	before	untying	it
and	 walking	 it	 out	 of	 the	 stable.	 The	 stable	 guards	 were	 sleeping	 on	 charpoys
under	 the	 open	 sky.	 Karna	 steered	 the	 horse	 clear	 of	 them	 and	 began	 walking
towards	the	gate,	careful	to	keep	to	the	shadow	of	the	thick	fort	wall.	He	mounted
only	when	he	was	sure	he	had	put	enough	distance	between	himself	and	the	stables
and	then	trotted	towards	the	gate,	telling	himself	to	remain	calm.
There	 were	 streaks	 of	 red	 in	 the	 Eastern	 sky.	 The	 Morning	 Star	 shone	 brightly.
Karna	kept	an	eye	on	his	pursuers,	who	were	showing	signs	of	agitation.	Suddenly
one	of	them	stopped	and	stared	in	his	direction.	Karna	halted,	hoping	that	stillness
would	 be	 less	 conspicuous	 than	 movement.	 The	 moon	 escaped	 the	 folds	 of	 the
dark	clouds	exactly	at	that	moment.	One	of	the	men	saw	Karna	on	the	horse	and
clicked	his	tongue	loudly	to	alert	his	companions.	They	turned	immediately,	saw
him,	and	sprinted	in	pursuit.	Karna	galloped	towards	the	gates.	He	had	no	idea	of
how	 he	 would	 make	 the	 guards	 open	 the	 massive	 fort	 gates	 before	 his	 enemies
caught	 up	 with	 him.	 The	 wall	 was	 too	 high	 to	 jump	 over.	 His	 horse	 neighed	 in
frustration,	finding	its	path	blocked.	The	guards,	who	had	been	dozing,	awoke	and
saw	Karna	struggling	to	control	his	horse.	Karna	cursed	his	luck	as	more	guards

came	running	towards	him	from	various	parts	of	the	fort.	He	was	trapped!
Karna	 saw	 that	 his	 four	 pursuers	 had	 quietly	 slipped	 away	 and	 were	 no	 longer
part	of	the	posse	which	now	surrounded	him	with	naked	swords	and	lances	at	the
ready.	 Obviously,	 they	 did	 not	 want	 the	 others	 to	 know	 of	 their	 presence.	 That
made	them	all	the	more	dangerous.	Karna	knew	that	even	if	he	somehow	managed
to	talk	his	way	out,	he	would	still	have	to	face	those	dangerous	men	later	on	his
long	journey	to	Hastinapura.
The	 Security	 Chief	 arrived.	 Pointing	 his	 sword	 at	 Karna,	 he	 barked	 at	 him	 to
dismount.	 Karna	 complied	 without	 a	 word.	 Resisting	 would	 have	 been	 foolish.
There	 were	 hundreds	 of	 armed	 guards	 around	 him.	 He	 did	 not	 know	 how	 to
explain	 the	 possession	 of	 a	 horse	 from	 the	 Royal	 stables.	 It	 would	 be
embarrassing	if	his	host	was	informed.
“Hey!	 Aren’t	 you	 the	 warrior	 who	 sought	 audience	 this	 morning?”	 the	 Security
Chief	asked.	Karna	looked	down.	It	was	shameful	to	be	caught	as	a	common	thief.
“Do	you	have	any	explanation	for	this,	Sir?”	the	Chief	asked	politely.
Karna	could	not	think	of	any	answer	without	being	untruthful.	The	Chief	called	one
of	his	assistants	and	said	something	to	him	softly.	The	man	bowed	and	ran	towards
the	 palace.	 Karna	 knew	 what	 that	 meant	 and	 fervently	 wished	the	 ground	 would
open	and	swallow	him	up.	The	messenger	had	gone	to	fetch	Balarama.
***

“What	is	this	nonsense,	Chief?”	The	booming	voice	of	the	Yadava	leader	filled	the
air	and	the	guards	immediately	bowed	respectfully.
“Your	Excellency,	this	man	was	trying	to	steal…”	began	the	Chief.
Balarama	interrupted	him.	“Steal!	Do	you	know	who	he	is?	This	horse	is	my	gift
to	him.	You	have	now	insulted	my	guest.	Chief,	people	will	laugh	if	they	hear	of
this	incident.	Is	this	the	way	the	Yadavas	treat	their	friends	and	guests?	What	have
you	done,	Sir?”
The	 Chief	 hung	 his	 head	 in	 shame	 while	 Karna	 looked	 at	 Balarama	 in
astonishment.	 “I	 apologize	 for	 my	 audacity,	 Sir.	 Please	 forgive	 your	 humble
servant.”	The	Chief	bowed	before	Karna,	burning	with	shame.

Karna	was	at	loss	for	words.	The	man	had	only	been	doing	his	duty	and	was	now
being	 shamed	 before	 his	 subordinates.	 Anything	 Karna	 said	 would	 sound
incongruous.
“Do	not	worry	Chief,”	Balarama	said,	patting	the	poor	man	on	the	shoulder.	“You
have	done	your	duty	well.	It	is	my	fault.	I	should	have	informed	you	earlier	that
our	 guest	 would	 be	 leaving	 early.	 All	 of	 you	 have	 served	 Dwaraka	 well,”
Balarama	said	to	the	guards.	Smiles	broke	out	on	the	previously	anxious	faces.
“Sir,	you	are	too	kind,	we	do	but	our	duty…”	The	Chief	kept	his	head	bowed	but
his	shoulders	were	no	longer	tense.
Karna	 touched	 Balarama’s	 feet	 and	 whispered	 that	 he	 was	 sorry	 for	 what	 had
happened.	The	first	rays	of	the	sun	were	nudging	the	earth	from	her	sleep.
“Beware,	Karna!	The	path	you	have	chosen	is	not	easy.	I	do	not	know	what	has
transpired	to	make	you	leave	in	such	desperate	haste.	But	danger	will	always	be
just	 one-step	 behind	 you.	 You	 have	 dared	 to	 challenge	 centuries-old	 prejudices
and	 the	 old	 India	 is	 not	 going	 to	 let	 you	 go	 so	 easily.	 May	 the	 compassionate
blessings	 of	 Mahadeva	 be	 with	 you	 always.	 Whatever	 happens,	 remember	 one
thing	–	be	grateful	for	what	life	has	offered	you	and	be	generous,	especially	when
fortune	 and	 luck	 desert	 you.	 Godspeed	 Karna.	 I	 hope	 Hastinapura	 will	 have	 the
eyes	to	see	your	ability	and	not	your	caste.”
As	Karna	mounted	his	horse,	he	heard	another	voice	that	instantly	filled	him	with
dread.	 He	 quickly	 turned	 his	 head	 and	 saw	 Krishna	 in	 all	 his	 divine	 glory,
standing	 beside	 his	 frowning	 elder	 brother.	 The	 smile	 never	 left	 Krishna’s	 dark
and	handsome	face	when	he	repeated	what	he	had	said	earlier,	a	little	more	loudly
this	 time,	 “Hastinapura	 is	 very	 far	 away,	 my	 friend…	 really	 far,	 and	 the	 path	 is
perilous	and	hard.	Do	you	have	it	in	you	to	make	it,	Karna?”
Karna	 felt	 his	 anger	 rise	 at	 the	 taunt	 but	 willed	 himself	 to	 keep	 calm.	 Saying
nothing,	 he	 brought	 his	 palms	 together	 and	 bowed	 his	 head.	 Turning	 his	 horse
towards	 the	 rising	 sun,	 he	 said	 a	 silent	 prayer.	 His	 heart	 leapt	 with	 joy	 at	 the
prospect	 of	 going	 home.	 ‘Hastinapura	 is	 waiting	 for	 me,’	 he	 thought,	 closing	 his
eyes	for	a	moment	to	trap	the	bliss	he	felt.	He	did	not	think	of	the	dangers	that	lay
ahead.	 He	 only	 felt	 extreme	 gratitude	 for	 life.	 And	 so	 he	 left	 the	 two	 Yadava
brothers,	 so	 different	 from	 each	 other,	 to	 fight	 their	 own	 cold	 wars.	 He	 turned

north,	 leaving	 behind	 the	 streets	 of	 Dwaraka	 with	 the	 milling	 crowds	 who	 were
indifferent	 to	 his	 destiny	 and	 pursuits.	 He	 would	 ride	 through	 steaming	 jungles,
sweltering	 deserts,	 and	 dry	 riverbeds,	 in	 the	 coming	 days.	 Hastinapura	 awaited
the	return	of	the	humble	Suta	who	had	dared	to	dream.
Unknown	to	him,	four	soldiers	left	Dwaraka	after	him.	Their	mission	was	clear:
capture	 the	Suta	or	kill	him.	A	messenger	 also	 left	for	 Hastinapura.	 He	 was	 the
first	of	a	galloping	relay,	carrying	an	urgent	message	to	the	Priest	Dhaumya,	who
would	receive	it	 much	before	Karna’s	arrival;	if	Karna	managed	to	reach	at	all.
Someone	was	taking	no	chances.	In	similar	fashion,	other	messengers	travelled	to
the	important	cities	of	the	Southern	Confederate.	All	the	messages	were	identical:
The	fly	is	caught	in	the	trap.

17	WANTED
HASTINAPURA	 WAS	 GETTING	 READY	 for	 the	 big	 event.	

It	 was	 the	 culmination	 of
twelve	years	of	training.	The	hundred	sons	of	King	Dhritarashtra	and	the	five	sons
of	 his	 brother	 Pandu	 would	 show	 the	 world	 they	 had	 grown	 into	 fine	 warriors
under	Guru	Drona.	Invitations	had	gone	out	to	the	many	kingdoms	of	India	–	from
Gandhara	 in	 the	 West,	 to	 Kamarupa	 in	 the	 East,	 to	 Kashimira	 in	 the	 North,	 and
Lanka	 in	 the	 South.	 Many	 of	 the	 invitees	 were	 vassal	 Kings	 and	 the	 invitation
constituted	an	order	from	the	Grand	Regent,	couched	in	polite	language,	to	attend
the	event.	Others	were	friendly	States,	like	Dwaraka	and	Vanga,	and	their	rulers
were	present	at	the	grand	event	as	a	gesture	of	goodwill.
It	was	midnight	when	Bhishma	summoned	Vidhura	to	his	chamber.	“I	am	worried
about	the	Southern	Confederate.	They	should	not	be	made	to	feel	insecure	by	our
open	 display	 of	 warriors	 and	 arms.	 Is	 there	 any	 basis	 for	 the	 rumours	 about
Parashurama?”	Bhishma	did	not	take	his	eyes	from	the	pile	of	palm	leaves	in	front
of	him.
“The	spies	say	he	has	yet	to	regain	consciousness.	If	this	is	untrue	and	he	is	well,
it	 would	 be	 risky	 to	 invite	 the	 wrath	 of	 the	 Confederate.”	 Vidhura	 waited	 for
Bhishma	to	lift	his	gaze	from	the	palm	leaves.
“Vidhura,	 do	 you	 imagine	 I	 am	 afraid	 of	 war	 with	 anyone?	 The	 only	 thing	 that
stops	 me	 is	 my	 reluctance	 to	 break	 two	 decades	 of	 peace.	 The	 Southern
Confederate	 is	 far	 away,	but	Khandiva	is	nearby.	Takshaka	has	already	deposed
the	last	Indra	and	made	him	into	a	puppet.	We	can	expect	an	attack	from	his	ragtag
mob	any	time.”	Bhishma	placed	another	palm	leaf	to	his	left	after	reading	it.
“Sir,	a	bigger	threat	is	the	worsening	law	and	order	situation	in	the	city.	Should	I
flush	 out	 that	 rat,	 Durjaya?	 He	 is	 using	 the	 Gandhara	 market	 as	 a	 cover	 for	 his
nefarious	 activities.	 It	 is	 high	 time	 we	 demolish	 the	 market.”	 Vidhura	 fidgeted,
stopping	himself	from	uttering	the	Gandhara	Prince’s	name.
Bhishma	 wearily	 put	 down	 the	 palm	 leaf	 he	 was	 reading	 and	 rubbed	 his	 tired
eyes.	“Vidhura,	I	have	always	tried	to	project	a	tolerant	image	towards	different

races	and	faiths.	I	do	not	want	to	become	a	northern	version	of	the	Confederate.
Demolishing	the	Gandhara	market	will	be	stomping	on	the	rights	of	the	minorities.
Durjaya	is	a	petty	crook.	We	can	finish	him	whenever	we	want.	Concentrate	on	the
Nagas	and	keep	a	strict	watch	on	the	Confederate.”
Vidhura	wanted	to	retort	that	the	majority	of	people	like	himself,	the	Shudras	and
the	 Untouchables,	did	not	 have	any	rights	in	 Bhishma’s	tolerant	land.	But	he	did
not	say	it	aloud	and	so	escaped	the	wrath	of	the	old	man.	It	would	have	been	an
unfair	accusation.	The	Grand	Regent	had	personally	vetoed	Dhaumya’s	proposal
to	 reserve	 all	 Government	 posts	 for	 Brahmins,	 only	 that	 morning.	 It	 was	 late.
Vidhura	 longed	 to	 go	 home,	 hug	 his	 children,	 and	 sleep	 like	 a	 log.	 He	 looked
outside	the	window.	A	lustrous	moon	bathed	the	earth	in	silver	light.	The	peace	of
the	night	was	misleading.
“What	the	hell	is	this?”
Bhishma’s	question	shook	Vidhura	from	his	musings.	He	took	the	palm	leaf	from
Bhishma’s	hand	and	moved	to	read	it	in	the	dim	light.	The	colour	drained	from	his
face.	 “Sir,	 this	 is	 explosive,”	 he	 said	 as	 he	 handed	 the	 message	 back	 with	 a
trembling	hand.
“Hmm…	 not	 yet,	 but	 it	 could	 very	 well	 turn	 out	 to	 be.	 We	 have	 to	 stop	 him,”
Bhishma	 said	 gravely.	 He	 read	 the	 message	 one	 more	 time.	 It	 was	 from	 the
Maharaja	of	Vatapi,	a	powerful	King	of	the	Southern	Confederate.	A	Shudra	boy
from	Hastinapura	had	betrayed	and	insulted	the	Kings	of	the	Southern	Confederate
by	 becoming	 the	 Dharmaveera.	 The	 Confederate	 demanded	 that	 Hastinapura
capture	and	hand	over	the	scoundrel	to	them;	failing	which,	the	peace	treaty	would
be	considered	invalid.	It	was	almost	an	open	declaration	of	war.
“Watch	out	for	him.	Send	a	few	capable	men	to	search.	Seal	all	the	roads	leading
to	 the	 city.	 He	 must	 be	 caught	 at	 any	 cost.”	 Bhishma	 stood	 up	 from	 his	 seat	 and
began	pacing	up	and	down.
“That	would	be	impossible	Sir,	with	the	thousands	flowing	into	the	city	from	all
over	India	to	watch	the	grand	ceremony.	There	will	be	more	than	20,000	people	in
the	 arena	 on	 the	 day	 and	 many	 more	 thousands	 milling	 around	 the	 mela	 grounds
nearby.	 Nothing	 like	 this	 has	 happened	 in	 two	 decades	 and	 everyone	 is	 excited.
How	 can	 we	 stop	 a	 single	 man	 from	 entering?”	 Vidhura	 asked,	 as	 he	 took	 the

message	to	read.
His	 hands	 trembled.	 Anything	 untoward	 happening	 at	 the	 Graduation	 ceremony
was	 unthinkable.	 The	 responsibility	 was	 his.	 “Besides,	 security	 arrangements
have	 been	 beefed	 up	 to	 prevent	 a	 possible	 Naga	 strike.	 We	 do	 not	 have	 the
workforce	 to	 start	 a	 manhunt	 now.	 This	 is	 apart	 from	 the	 policemen	 needed	 to
prevent	petty	mischief	like	chain	snatching	and	theft,	from	Durjaya’s	gang.	We	are
overstretched	as	it	is,	Sir.”	Vidhura	was	almost	pleading	now.	As	an	afterthought
he	 added,	 “Besides,	 we	 do	 not	 know	 what	 he	 looks	 like,	 where	 he	 is	 from,	 or
anything	else.”
“Vidhura,	do	not	panic.	Think	with	a	clear	head.	If	my	memory	serves,	you	once
took	 the	 same	 boy	 to	 Drona,	 a	 few	 years	 ago.	 You	 remember	 that	 charioteer…
what	 was	 his	 name?	 His	 boy	 wanted	 to	 be	 a	 warrior	 and	 our	 Guru	 refused	 him
since	he	was	a	Suta.”
“Vasusena	 Karna,	 Athiratha’s	 son?”	 Vidhura	 asked	 in	 shock.	 He	 had	 fond
memories	 of	 the	 bright	 and	 enthusiastic	 son	 of	 the	 charioteer	 and	 still	 smarted
from	the	insult	he	had	suffered	at	Drona’s	hands.
“I	believe	it	is	the	same	boy.	I	admire	his	grit	and	determination.	Alas,	we	live	in
a	petty	world.	We	will	have	to	sacrifice	him	to	avoid	a	bloody	war	and	loss	of
life.	Capture	him	alive.	I	do	not	want	his	blood	on	our	hands.	His	only	fault	was	to
be	 born	 into	 the	 wrong	 caste.	 Deliver	 him	 to	 the	 fanatics	 of	 the	 Southern
Confederate	 and	 be	 done	 with	 it.	 I	 am	 confident	 you	 will	 find	 a	 way	 to	 capture
him.	Just	see	to	it	that	he	does	not	end	up	as	another	Naga	rebel.	And,	of	course,
keep	 him	 away	 from	 that	 crazy	 Kripa	 at	 any	 cost.	 We	 cannot	 afford	 any	 of	 his
pranks	right	now.	Good	night,	son.	Meet	me	in	my	chambers	early	in	the	morning.”
The	Grand	Regent	vanished	into	his	private	chambers,	leaving	a	worried	Vidhura
alone.
Vidhura	 stood	 in	 the	 pale,	 flickering	 light	 of	 torches	 that	 threw	 haphazardly
moving	shadows	 in	the	corridor,	and	pushed	 his	tired	mind	to	 think	clearly.	The
boy	would	have	grown	into	a	young	man	by	now.	How	could	anyone	identify	him
amongst	 the	 thousands	 who	 would	 flock	 to	 the	 city	 for	 the	 ceremony?	 Vidhura
began	walking	towards	his	quarters,	immersed	in	thought.	Karna	would	certainly
visit	 his	 parents.	 Yes!	 That	 was	 it.	 He	 would	 place	 guards	 in	 disguise	 near
Athiratha’s	 house.	 But	 what	 if	 Karna	 thought	 it	 better	 to	 visit	 the	 arena	 before

seeing	 his	 parents?	 No,	 surveillance	 of	 the	 charioteer’s	 house	 would	 not	 be
enough.	It	would	be	far	better	to	capture	him	in	the	outskirts	and	send	him	packing
to	the	South	without	any	fuss.	A	meeting	between	Takshaka’s	men	and	Karna	could
prove	disastrous.
‘Tomorrow	I	 will	 visit	 the	 charioteer’s	 hut	 along	 with	 the	 Court	 artist,’	 Vidhura
thought.	 Perhaps	 the	 boy	 resembled	 his	 father.	 The	 artist	 could	 make	 a	 rough
portrait	 of	 Karna	 using	 the	 father	 as	 a	 model	 –	 a	 younger	 Athiratha,	 with	 more
muscle	and	a	well-built	body,	as	they	said	the	young	man	was	a	great	warrior.	He
could	then	send	his	spies	to	every	nook	and	corner	of	the	city	with	copies	of	the
portrait	and	perhaps	they	would	find	him.	Better,	he	would	announce	a	reward	for
capturing	Karna	alive	and	post	the	pictures	around	the	city.	He	would	merely	say
Karna	 was	 a	 wanted	 criminal,	 and	 an	 award	 of	 10,000	 gold	 coins	 would	 be
sufficient	 to	 tempt	 many	 to	 keep	 a	 lookout	 for	 him.	 It	 might	 just	 work.	 Vidhura
entered	his	spartan	chamber	and	gently	closed	the	door.	‘Tonight,	my	family	will
sleep	 without	 me	 again,’	 he	 thought	 ruefully.	 It	 was	 almost	 dawn	 before	 sleep
blessed	the	harassed	Prime	Minister	of	Hastinapura.
***

Another	 soul	 was	 wide-awake	 with	 excitement	 in	 a	 distant	 wing	 of	 the	 palace.
Purochana	knocked	on	Shakuni’s	door	a	few	minutes	after	Bhishma	retired	to	his
chambers.	 After	 some	 time,	 the	 bureaucrat	 left	 the	 Gandhara	 Prince’s	 room,
disgruntled.	The	foreign	Prince	had	 not	 shown	 much	 enthusiasm	 for	 the	 news	 he
had	brought.
“What	good	will	it	do	Gandhara	if	a	Suta	cocks	a	snook	at	the	fundamentalists	of
the	 Southern	 Confederate?”	 he	 asked	 Purochana.	 He	 grudgingly	 put	 a	 few	 silver
coins	into	the	open	palm	of	the	bureaucrat	for	this	bit	of	useless	information.
Purochana	left	cursing	the	entire	lineage	of	Gandhara	under	his	breath.
But	 when	 he	 had	 closed	 the	 door	 securely	 behind	 Purochana,	 Shakuni	 smiled,
wanting	to	yell	with	joy.	He	fished	out	the	dice	from	his	waistband	and	threw	them
onto	the	marble	table	crying	out,	“Twelve!”	When	the	dice	spun	and	settled	on	the
same	 number,	 he	 rubbed	 his	 hands	 in	 glee.	 Looking	 at	 the	 dice	 he	 had	 chiselled
from	his	slain	father’s	thighbone,	he	chuckled.	“Father,	things	are	moving	as	you
would	have	wished.	I	can	see	blood.	I	can	smell	death.	India…	you	are	finished…

war…	 the	 BIG	 WAR…	 Bhishma,	 you	 bastard…	 I	 will	 show	 you	 what	 a
Gandharan	can	do	to	your	country.”	Shakuni	laughed.	He	dropped	to	the	ground,
bowing	to	the	West,	again	and	again.
After	a	while,	his	trance	broke	and	he	rushed	to	his	writing	table.	He	had	urgent
work	to	do.	He	hurriedly	scribbled	a	note	to	Durjaya.	If	the	underworld	lord	could
catch	the	stupid	Suta,	he	could	be	held	hostage	while	the	tension	mounted	between
Hastinapura	and	the	Confederate.	Perhaps	he	could	be	smuggled	to	Gandhara	and
hidden	in	one	of	the	caves	in	the	mountains	while	the	Indians	fought	and	destroyed
each	other	in	a	bloody	war.	The	only	thing	he	had	to	do	was	plant	a	rumour	that
Hastinapura	was	shielding	Karna	–	who	had	insulted	all	those	egoistical	fools	of
the	South.	Things	were	moving	his	way	sooner	than	he	had	expected.
***

“I	 have	 done	 whatever	 that	 bloody	 foreigner	 has	 asked.	 I	 have	 made	 the	 city
unsafe,	ensured	no	one	sleeps	peacefully,	arranged	for	plunder	and	arson.	Hell,	I
have	even	given	instructions	to	my	minions	to	pray	facing	West,	towards	his	frigid
country.	Though	I	do	not	care	one	way	or	the	other	about	that.	But	what	more	does
he	want?”	Durjaya	glared	at	Purochana.
“Durjaya,	you	have	done	a	good	job	and	the	Prince	is	happy	with	you.	But	he	asks
you	to	expand	your	activities	to	other	cities	as	well,	even	to	those	of	the	Southern
Confederate.	Can	you	make	every	city	and	town	in	India	unsafe?”	Purochana	took
a	sip	of	the	expensive	wine	he	had	brought	as	a	gift	for	the	underworld	king.
“You	want	Bhishma	on	my	back	again?	For	the	pittance	your	Prince	throws	at	me,
I	have	delivered	well.”
“Money	 is	 not	 a	 constraint.	 Do	 you	 have	 the	 capability	 or	 should	 I	 try	 some	 of
your	rival	gangs	in	the	city?”
“Are	you	threatening	me,	Purochana?”
“Are	you	feeling	threatened,	my	friend?”
Durjaya	glared	at	the	Inspector	of	Hygiene	with	distaste.	Purochana	took	another
sip	and	smiled.	“Let	me	hear	what	he	is	offering,”	Durjaya	said	finally.

Purochana	 nodded.	 After	 much	 haggling,	 the	 price	 for	 bleeding	 India	 through	 a
thousand	 cuts	 was	 fixed.	 As	 an	 afterthought,	 Purochana	 said,	 “Is	 catching	 a	 Suta
too	much	to	ask	of	you?”
“Stop	talking	in	riddles	and	tell	me	the	price.	What	Suta?”
Purochana	took	the	cloth	drawing	Vidhura	had	pasted	all	over	the	city	and	placed
it	on	the	table	in	front	of	Durjaya.
“Bah!	For	10,000	coins,	you	want	to	me	do	this?	Are	you	insulting	me	with	petty
change	now?”
“Fool!”	 Durjaya	 winced	 at	 the	 insult.	 Purochana	 chuckled	 to	 himself.	 How	 the
equation	had	changed	from	his	first	visit.	“Catch	him	and	hold	him.	If	instructions
come,	smuggle	him	to	Gandhara.	You	will	be	rich	beyond	your	wildest	dreams.”
“Who	is	this	man?	Why	is	he	wanted	so	badly?”	asked	Durjaya	suspiciously.
“He	is	someone	who	will	change	the	entire	history	of	this	country.”
Durjaya	 stared	 at	 Purochana,	 then	 at	 the	 drawing.	 Finally,	 he	 said,	 “Tell	 me	 the
amount.”
***

By	 the	 next	 evening,	 the	 entire	 city	 of	 Hastinapura	 was	 swarming	 with	 men
looking	 for	 Karna.	 Vidhura’s	 spies	 and	 Durjaya’s	 henchmen	 roamed	 the	 streets,
scrutinizing	 the	 face	 of	 every	 stranger.	 All	 prominent	 corners	 and	 junctions	 had
cloth	posters	 with	 a	 portrait	 that	resembled	the	 poor	 charioteer	 Athiratha	 in	 his
younger	days.	The	huge	bounty	on	Karna’s	head	was	sufficient	for	many	to	forget
eating	and	sleeping	and	join	in	the	hunt	for	the	fugitive	instead.
Jara’s	 sleep	 was	 disturbed	 twice.	 When	 the	 night	 was	 still	 young,	 two	 police
constables	came	and	kicked	Dharma	the	dog	into	the	gutter.	They	beat	the	beggar
awake	and	thrust	the	crude	picture	of	the	wanted	man	in	his	face.	It	looked	vaguely
familiar	 to	 Jara,	 but	 he	 shrugged	 his	 shoulders	 and	 smiled	 at	 them,	 showing	 his
crooked	teeth.	They	cursed	him	and	left,	asking	him	to	inform	them	if	he	happened
to	see	the	man.	Jara	went	back	to	sleep.	The	blind	dog	crawled	back	to	him.	In	the
dead	 of	 the	 night,	 Durjaya’s	 men	 woke	 him	 again,	 with	 a	 sharp	 kick	 to	 his	 ribs;

showed	 him	 the	 same	 picture	 and	 asked	 him	 the	 same	 questions.	 Jara	 realised
something	serious	was	happening.
The	thugs	went	away,	giving	Jara	the	same	warning	the	police	had.	Jara	realized
who	the	man	was	now.	It	was	the	charioteer	Athiratha,	but	looking	much	younger.
He	and	Ekalavya	had	once	visited	his	house	many	years	ago	on	the	day	they	had
seen	 Takshaka	 attacking	 the	 Hastinapura	 fort.	 His	 wife	 had	 fed	 them	 well	 that
night.	Jara	forgot	many	things	but	never	acts	of	kindness,	for	they	were	few	and	far
between	in	his	life.	He	owed	the	charioteer’s	family	for	the	food	they	had	given
him	long	ago.	They	were	probably	not	looking	for	the	charioteer	himself	but	his
son,	thought	Jara.	Who	would	pay	so	much	for	a	charioteer?	If	the	life	of	the	son
was	in	danger,	he	ought	to	do	something.
Jara	 stood	 up	 from	 the	 footpath	 he	 had	 slept	 on	 and	 began	 walking	 towards	 a
tavern	on	the	southern	outskirts	of	the	city.	There	were	many	paths	leading	to	the
city	but	Jara	trusted	his	instincts.	He	was	sure	the	fugitive	would	choose	this	way.
Jara	would	await	his	arrival	and	warn	him	if	possible.
Initially,	 the	 tavern	 owner	 tried	 to	 chase	 him	 off,	 but	 when	 he	 discovered	 the
beggar	could	sing	beautifully	about	the	glories	of	God,	and	that	travellers	stopped
to	listen	to	him,	he	decided	to	tolerate	Jara’s	presence.	It	was	good	for	business
and	 the	 songs	 the	 beggar	 sung	 were	 about	 a	 compassionate	 Krishna,	 and	 moved
tired	travellers	to	tears.	Moreover,	Jara	paid	for	his	food	with	the	coins	he	earned
by	singing.	The	tavern	owner	could	afford	that	kind	of	charity.	So	the	beggar	sat
waiting	 for	 his	 man,	 singing	 about	 his	 God,	 with	 Dharma	 the	 blind	 dog,	 for
company.
***

Unaware	of	the	peril	 that	 awaited	 him,	 Karna	 galloped	 towards	 Hastinapura.	 It
had	been	a	long	and	arduous	journey.	A	merchant	he	met	had	advised	him	to	travel
through	the	drying	bed	of	the	river	Saraswati	to	save	time.	As	Karna	rode	through
the	 dying	 river	 with	 its	 ankle-deep	 water	 and	 huge	 patches	 of	 barren	 sand,	 he
could	not	help	but	remember	the	grand	civilizations,	which	had	flourished	on	its
banks	thousands	of	years	ago.	The	history	of	the	grand	Asura	civilization,	with	its
sprawling	 cities;	 and	 the	 awe-inspiring	 stories	 of	 the	 First	 Indra,	 who	 smashed
those	 cities	 and	 brought	 Deva	 rule	 to	 India,	 flashed	 through	 his	 mind.	 ‘This	 is
where	 the	 Vedas	 were	 born,’	 he	 thought.	 ‘These	 are	 the	 banks	 upon	 which	 the

ancient	sages	sat	and	pondered	upon	the	Universe	and	the	riddle	of	life.’	Where
had	the	heroes	gone?	Where	were	Rama,	Ravana,	Mahabali,	Indra,	and	Bali	–	the
heroes	 of	 the	 Devas,	 Asuras,	 Nagas,	 and	 the	 tribes	 who	 had	 inhabited	 this	 holy
land?	Why	did	such	people	no	longer	exist?	‘Perhaps	I	am	being	harsh	about	our
modern	 times,	 since	 history	 has	 a	 tendency	 to	 scatter	 gold	 dust	 over	 mundane
things.	 Who	 knows	 what	 those	 heroes	 were	 really	 like	 in	 real	 life?	 Some	 may
have	been	tyrants	or	despots.	Myths	acquire	colour	over	time.	Perhaps	Balarama,
or	even	Krishna,	will	become	a	hero,	or	even	a	God,	as	time	goes	by.’
Karna	 smiled	 at	 the	 thought.	 Krishna	 was	 already	 considered	 a	 God.	 He	 was
carefully	cultivating	his	image	as	an	avatar	of	Lord	Vishnu	and	everything	he	did
was	projected	as	a	miracle.	Already,	among	the	cattle	herders	and	lower	classes,
he	 was	 thought	 a	 God	 and	 they	 prayed	 to	 him.	 The	 Krishna	 path	 was	 easy.	 He
asked	only	for	people	to	believe	in	him	and	promised	miracles	would	happen	in
his	devotees’	lives.	He	was	an	easy	God	to	follow.	Balarama	offered	no	miracles
other	 than	 hard	 work;	 no	 heaven	 other	 than	 the	 here	 and	 now;	 and	 no	 sanctuary
other	than	self-belief.	He	was	a	wise	man	leading	a	country	of	fools.	‘My	country
does	not	deserve	Balarama,’	Karna	thought	ruefully.
The	clang	of	an	arrow	hitting	his	armour	jolted	him	abruptly	from	his	reverie.	He
looked	around	surprised,	trying	to	see	where	the	attack	had	come	from.	He	stared
into	 the	 thick	 shrubs	 on	 the	 left	 bank	 of	 the	 river	 and	 steered	 his	 horse	 towards
them.	He	had	whipped	out	his	bow	and	an	arrow	gleamed	between	his	rock-steady
fingers.	He	waited	for	a	single	move	by	his	unknown	enemy	to	identify	his	hiding
place	to	finish	him	off.	Not	a	leaf	stirred.	But	Karna	knew	enemies	were	close	by.
He	 could	 sense	 their	 presence	 and	 feel	 their	 eyes	 watching	 his	 every	 move.	 He
was	 out	 in	 the	 open	 and	 vulnerable	 –	 easy	 prey.	 His	 armour	 had	 saved	 him	 but
Karna	knew	it	would	just	be	a	matter	of	time	before	they	aimed	at	his	face	and	got
a	 lucky	 hit.	 Another	 arrow	 swished	 by,	 perilously	 close	 to	 his	 ear.	 It	 had	 come
from	 a	 different	 angle	 to	 the	 first.	 It	 was	 foolish	 to	 wait	 around	 for	 an	 arrow	 to
pierce	his	throat.
Karna	whirled	his	horse	round	quickly	and	took	flight.	Suddenly	it	began	raining
arrows.	 He	 ducked	 and	 weaved	 across	 dry	 shrubs	 and	 leaped	 over	 boulders,
urging	his	horse	through	puddles	of	water	at	a	gallop,	trying	desperately	to	gather
speed.	The	sun	was	a	ball	of	fire	over	his	head	and	the	desert	sizzled	with	heat.
Karna	sped	across	the	heart	of	the	holy	river,	praying.	He	had	to	make	it	to	cover
and	fight	back	before	an	arrow	found	its	mark.	He	turned	his	head	as	he	jumped

over	a	thorny	shrub	and	saw	them	clearly.	There	were	four	warriors	and	they	were
gaining	 on	 him.	 Karna	 whipped	 out	 his	 bow	 again	 and	 shot	 an	 arrow	 without
slowing	 his	 horse.	 He	 had	 aimed	 at	 the	 leading	 man’s	 head,	 but	 the	 man	 ducked
easily	and	continued	gaining	on	Karna.	Another	arrow	hit	Karna’s	armour,	almost
piercing	it.	He	knew	he	was	at	a	disadvantageous	position.	He	was	outnumbered
and	 fleeing	 from	 them.	 His	 back	 was	 towards	 them	 and	 he	 had	 lost	 precious
seconds	 in	 turning	 his	 body	 to	 take	 aim.	 He	 had	 no	 choice	 other	 than	 to	 be
recklessly	brave.
Karna	pulled	at	the	reigns	of	his	horse	suddenly	and	it	stopped	dead	in	its	tracks.
He	jumped	down	and	shot	an	arrow,	all	in	one	fluid	movement.	It	pierced	the	eye
of	one	of	the	warriors,	and	he	fell	from	his	steed.	The	remaining	three	did	not	even
pause	to	look	back	at	their	fallen	colleague.	They	had	been	through	enough	battles
to	be	indifferent	to	death.	Karna	tried	to	suppress	his	rising	panic	as	he	saw	them
approaching.	 He	 fired	 the	 next	 arrow.	 This	 time	 it	 caught	 the	 right	 arm	 of	 a
galloping	warrior,	who	uttered	a	foul	curse	as	he	plucked	it	from	his	flesh	without
caring	 to	 look	 at	 the	 wound.	 The	 leader	 shot	 an	 arrow	 that	 almost	 got	 Karna.	 It
missed	the	Suta’s	throat	by	a	whisker	but	pierced	the	horse’s	stomach.	It	neighed
and	began	thrashing	around	wildly.
As	they	neared	the	trapped	Suta,	the	warriors	put	their	bows	back	and	drew	out
their	glistening	swords.	Karna	shot	arrow	upon	arrow	at	them.	He	found	his	mark
many	 times	 but	 none	 of	 the	 hits	 was	 fatal	 or	 sufficient	 to	 slow	 the	 warriors.
Finally,	he	threw	away	his	bow	and	arrow	and	fumbled	at	his	waist.	He	could	see
the	 looming	 figure	 of	 the	 leader	 closing	 in	 on	 him	 as	 he	 tried	 desperately	 to
extricate	his	sword.	The	horse	had	fallen	and	was	thrashing	wildly.	In	the	nick	of
time,	Karna	pulled	his	sword	free	and	blocked	certain	death	with	inches	to	spare.
Sparks	fell	over	him	from	the	clanging	swords	as	he	panted	with	exertion.
The	leader	smiled	at	Karna	as	the	three	remaining	warriors	circled	him	on	their
horses.	Hardened	veterans	as	they	were,	Karna’s	foolhardy	resistance	was	rather
amusing.	 They	 jumped	 down	 from	 their	 horses	 and	 stood	 in	 combat	 position,
swishing	their	swords	gently,	taunting	the	Suta.	They	had	been	pursuing	Karna	for
days	and	were	bored	with	inaction.	Hastinapura	was	only	a	day’s	journey	away
and	 the	 spot	 they	 had	 chosen	 to	 end	 the	 Suta’s	 adventure	 was	 the	 last	 desolate
area.	A	few	leagues	further	on,	villages	and	small	towns	peppered	the	highway	to
Hastinapura.	They	had	to	finish	this	upstart	with	no	witnesses	to	link	the	crime	to
their	master.	On	their	way	back,	many	taverns	offering	heady	brews	and	beautiful

women,	awaited	them.	The	leader	gestured	to	one	of	his	companions	to	end	this
silly	task.
The	warrior	who	moved	to	kill	Karna	was	arrogant	and	confident	of	his	own	skill.
What	could	a	novice	barely	out	of	his	teens	do	to	a	veteran	of	many	battles	like
him?	He	had	not	reckoned	on	Karna’s	skill	or	ferocity	while	fighting	for	his	life.
In	a	few	seconds,	the	man	was	bleeding	from	numerous	cuts	as	the	Suta	fought	like
a	 cornered	 beast.	 Things	 were	 not	 looking	 good	 for	 the	 pursuers.	 There	 was	 no
one	about	to	see	if	three	men	took	on	one	youngster	together,	so	the	leader	slyly
moved	to	corner	Karna,	gesturing	to	his	companions	to	attack	from	the	other	side.
A	thrust	of	the	sword	in	the	back	was	what	the	upstart	deserved	after	all.	It	did	not
work	out	the	way	the	leader	had	planned.	Instead,	Karna	left	him	sprawling	on	the
sand	with	a	powerful	kick	on	the	shin	before	he	could	even	use	his	sword.
“Why	are	you	doing	this	to	me?	What	wrong	have	I	done	to	you?”	Karna	yelled	in
anger.	“Get	lost!	Do	not	make	me	kill	you.	I	am	sorry	about	your	friend.”
The	warriors	looked	at	each	other	in	surprise.	The	death	of	their	companion	had
not	bothered	them	at	all.	Death	was	a	warrior’s	unfailing	friend,	but	the	audacity
of	a	Suta	to	say	to	their	faces	that	he	would	kill	them,	was	unbearable.	“Enough	of
these	games,”	the	leader	shouted	to	his	two	comrades.	“Let	us	teach	this	bastard	a
lesson.”
The	 three	 warriors	 rushed	 at	 Karna	 with	 drawn	 swords,	 screaming	 abuse	 and
taunting	 him	 about	 his	 low	 caste.	 Suddenly	 they	 halted,	 looking	 in	 amazement	 at
the	 sizzling,	 ribbon-like	 weapon	 in	 Karna’s	 right	 hand.	 They	 had	 never	 seen
anything	like	it.	It	wriggled	like	a	snake.
“What	is	this,	you	buffoon?	Your	mother’s	ribbon?”	the	leader	asked.	The	others
burst	 into	 uproarious	 laughter.	 The	 hilarity	 stopped	 when	 the	 urumi	 wrapped
around	 the	 leader’s	 neck	 in	 the	 blink	 of	 an	 eye.	 The	 blood	 drained	 from	 the
leader’s	face.	He	knew	what	it	was	now.	He	had	never	seen	the	weapon	but	had
heard	about	it	from	people	who	had	travelled	to	Asura	territory.	It	was	a	vicious
thing	with	a	mind	of	its	own.	He	could	feel	its	sharpness	cutting	into	his	neck.
“Let	me	go	on	my	way	and	I	will	not	hurt	any	of	you,”	Karna	pleaded	again.
The	 leader	 could	 see	 the	 logic	 in	 the	 Suta’s	 cry;	 however,	 before	 he	 could	 say

anything,	 his	 foolish	 companions	 rushed	 towards	 Karna	 with	 their	 swords.	 His
scream	 of	 “NO!”	 was	 never	 completed.	 The	 holy	 riverbed	 of	 the	 Saraswati	 had
been	soaked	with	blood	since	the	dawn	of	civilization.	The	leader’s	severed	head
was	just	a	minor	addition	to	her	bloody	treasures.	His	companions	soon	met	the
same	fate.	It	was	all	over	before	it	had	really	begun.
Then	the	unexpected	happened.	A	few	indifferent	crows,	a	dying	river,	and	some
sorry	shrubs,	were	the	only	witnesses.	Bards	in	the	pay	of	the	avatars	would	have
thrived	on	such	a	scene	and	narrated	how	wise	men	were	right	in	saying	that	only
people	 born	 into	 the	 Kshatriya	 caste	 could	 be	 warriors.	 How	 else	 could	 one
account	for	the	foolish	son	of	a	charioteer	who	sat	on	the	dry	riverbed	for	a	long
time,	feeling	guilty	about	the	lives	he	had	taken?	And	which	idiot	waited	two	days
in	 the	 desert,	 nursing	 his	 wounded	 horse,	 instead	 of	 thrusting	 his	 sword	 into	 its
heart	and	ending	its	misery,	as	any	warrior	would	have	done	without	blinking	an
eye?	Which	warrior	sweated	away	under	a	blistering	sun	to	give	it	a	burial	when
it	finally	died?	And	which	Kshatriya	foraged	for	dry	wood	to	give	his	slain	foes	a
proper	 cremation	 instead	 of	 leaving	 their	 corpses	 for	 the	 foxes,	 wolves	 and
vultures?	It	was	a	shame	the	Suta	did	not	know	the	basics	of	dharma.	His	duty	as
a	 warrior	 was	 to	 kill,	 not	 to	 worry	 about	 the	 consequences.	 Until	 he	 learnt,	 he
would	never	become	a	Kshatriya.
Such	stupidity	delayed	Karna	by	another	two	days.	The	horses	of	his	pursuers	had
escaped	into	the	vastness	of	the	desert	and	he	had	to	walk	the	rest	of	the	way.	On
the	 third	 day	 after	 his	 first	 killings,	 the	 charioteer’s	 son	 resumed	 his	 fateful
journey	towards	Hastinapura,	without	being	fully	aware	of	the	peril	he	faced.	The
city	awaited	her	prey	–	in	her	alleys	and	taverns,	at	her	busy	junctions,	in	shops
and	in	places	where	more	than	two	people	met;	they	spoke	of	only	one	thing:	the
fate	of	the	Suta	upstart.	Vidhura,	Durjaya,	and	Dhaumya’s	men	anxiously	scanned
the	face	of	every	new	person	arriving	in	the	city,	discreetly	comparing	it	to	what
they	assumed	to	be	the	sketch	of	Karna.	Many	enthusiastic	young	men,	drawn	by
the	bounty	on	his	head,	formed	gangs	to	patrol	the	streets	at	night,	stopping	every
stranger	 to	 question	 him	 about	 his	 credentials.	 They	 all	 waited	 for	 a	 man	 who
looked	like	the	charioteer	Athiratha	in	his	youth.	They	were	sure	Karna	would	try
sneaking	into	the	city	in	the	dead	of	night.
On	the	eve	of	the	grand	ceremony,	when	the	pompous	parade	of	the	Princes	set	the
streets	 of	 Hastinapura	 alight,	 Karna	 entered	 the	 city	 unchallenged.	 It	 was	 an
evening	in	which	the	crowds	were	dancing	wildly	to	the	beat	of	booming	drums

and	 blaring	 horns,	 and	 drunken	 men	 fell	 over	 each	 other	 on	 the	 footpaths.	 The
celebrations	 on	 the	 streets	 claimed	 every	 eye.	 Two	 irritated	 guards,	 who	 would
rather	have	been	partying	in	the	streets	than	doing	their	boring	duty	at	the	city	gate,
stopped	Karna	for	a	routine	check.	They	glanced	cursorily	at	his	face,	comparing
it	to	the	sketch	of	the	wanted	man.	There	was	no	resemblance.	So	they	took	their
customary	bribe	and	let	him	in	without	a	second	glance.
When	Karna	entered	the	tavern	beyond	the	gates	and	heard	the	gossip,	he	finally
understood	he	was	a	wanted	man,	with	a	huge	price	on	his	head.	Fortunately,	no
one	 recognized	 him	 but	 he	 knew	 it	 was	 only	 a	 matter	 of	 time	 before	 he	 bumped
into	 someone	 from	 his	 childhood.	 He	 lost	 his	 appetite.	 Fear	 knotted	 his	 guts,
making	him	dizzy.	He	could	not	touch	the	food	spread	on	the	plantain	leaf	before
him.	 He	 paid	 for	 the	 food	 and	 folded	 the	 leaf.	 He	 did	 not	 want	 to	 leave	 it
untouched.	Someone’s	 suspicions	 could	 be	 aroused.	 Instead,	 he	 casually	 walked
out,	like	the	many	customers	taking	food	home.
He	had	to	hide	somewhere	for	the	night.	The	next	day,	he	would	somehow	get	into
the	 arena	 and	 challenge	 the	 Princes.	 Perhaps	 they	 would	 not	 even	 allow	 him	 to
display	his	prowess	but	would	arrest	or	kill	him	before	he	even	entered.	It	was
also	 probable	 he	 would	 get	 only	 a	 few	 moments	 to	 demonstrate	 his	 skills.	 The
whole	of	India	was	hunting	for	him	for	not	allowing	caste	to	stand	in	the	way	of
his	ambition.	He	had	flouted	traditions	this	holy	land	held	sacred.	He	was	sure	he
would	pay	the	price.	‘Oh	Shiva,’	prayed	Karna,	please	let	me	live	one	more	day,
so	that	I	can	show	my	people	what	even	a	Suta	can	achieve	if	given	half	a	chance.’
Karna	was	about	to	throw	the	food	into	the	waste	pit	when	he	saw	a	beggar	sitting
under	 a	 tree.	 A	 dog	 sat	 resting	 its	 head	 on	 the	 beggar’s	 lap.	 Karna	 walked	 over
and	put	the	food	in	front	of	him.	The	beggar	smiled	at	Karna	gratefully.	Something
in	his	eyes	tugged	at	Karna’s	heart.
“Swami,	 you	 are	 very	 kind	 to	 feed	 our	 hunger.	 You	 are	 my	 Krishna,	 who	 has
brought	me	food,”	the	beggar	said,	folding	his	hands	together	to	honour	Karna.
Krishna’s	 name	 sent	 shivers	 down	 Karna’s	 spine.	 His	 fear	 returned.	 Did	 the
beggar	know	he	was	a	wanted	man?	Perhaps	when	the	police	questioned	him	later,
the	beggar	would	remember	his	face.	He	had	to	get	away	quickly.
“Swami,	 this	 is	 the	 second	 time	 you	 have	 given	 me	 food.	 I	 recognized	 you	 the

moment	 I	 saw	 you	 entering	 the	 city.	 All	 these	 people	 are	 looking	 for	 the	 wrong
face.	How	can	I	forget	the	taste	of	your	mother’s	cooking?	When	I	was	a	child,	I
came	 to	 your	 home	 with	 my	 friend;	 the	 night	 you	 stopped	 Takshaka	 so	 bravely.
Swami,	do	you	remember	me?”
Karna	 remembered	 him	 now.	 He	 was	 the	 Untouchable	 boy	 who	 had	 come	 home
that	night	with	Prime	Minister	Vidhura.	‘Oh	God,	he	knows	me!	This	is	the	end,’
Karna	 thought.	 Ten	 thousand	 gold	 coins	 would	 make	 the	 beggar	 rich	 beyond	 his
dreams	and	Karna	cursed	himself	for	his	impulse	in	giving	him	food.	A	group	of
guards	had	arrived	at	the	tavern	entrance	and	were	checking	each	traveller.	Karna
stood	helplessly,	unable	to	decide	whether	to	run	or	stay;	in	the	forlorn	hope	they
would	not	recognise	him.
“Swami,	 do	 not	 be	 afraid.	 Lord	 Krishna	 will	 be	 with	 you	 always.	 Trust	 me	 and
climb	this	tree.	There	is	a	hole	up	there,	where	a	man	can	hide.	Quick,	climb	up
now–”	Jara	urged	in	an	urgent	whisper.
Karna	 ran	 to	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 tree	 and	 hastily	 climbed	 up,	 his	 heart	 in	 his
mouth.	Why	were	they	chasing	him	like	a	criminal?	He	crawled	into	the	hole	and
held	his	breath.	The	dog	barked	and	Karna	peered	down	through	the	thick	canopy.
A	 couple	 of	 guards	 walked	 over	 to	 the	 beggar	 and	 shoved	 a	 cloth	 sketch	 in	 his
face.	 Jara	 mumbled	 something.	 The	 guards	 began	 beating	 him	 with	 their	 sticks.
Dharma’s	barking	and	the	beggar’s	whimpering	made	people	stop	and	stare	before
moving	 hurriedly	 away.	 Karna	 despised	 himself	 for	 not	 intervening	 to	 stop	 the
guards.	‘I	must	survive	till	Graduation	day,’	he	reminded	himself	over	and	over.
The	guards	finally	left,	kicking	the	dog	into	the	gutter,	where	it	lay	yelping.	When
Karna	regained	his	ability	to	breathe,	Jara	was	chanting	Krishna’s	name.
Karna	had	felt	proud	about	giving	him	leftover	food.	The	beggar’s	gratitude	had
made	him	feel	big	and	important.	Now,	after	what	Jara	had	done	for	him,	he	felt
small.	What	could	have	prompted	the	beggar	to	give	up	such	a	fortune	when	all	he
had	to	do	was	point	a	finger	upwards?	Was	it	just	the	little	rice	he	had	received	or
was	it	something	inexplicable	that	Karna’s	tired	mind	could	not	grasp?
As	the	night	wore	on,	the	crowds	in	the	streets	thinned.	The	tavern	finally	closed
its	doors.	The	sky	had	exploded	into	a	million	stars.	Jara	hummed	a	tune.	The	dog
stopped	whining	and	moved	closer.	Jara’s	calloused	hands	caressed	the	creature’s
head.	 The	 night	 remained	silent,	almost	in	 anticipation	 of	 something.	 Jara	 broke

into	joyous	song.	A	pleasant	breeze	ruffled	the	leaves	of	the	trees,	as	if	keeping
time	and	Karna	felt	peace	descend	upon	him	like	a	gentle	mist.	As	Jara	sang	about
the	mercy	and	compassion	of	God,	which	made	life	so	beautiful;	and	the	kindness
of	 humans,	 which	 made	 it	 so	 heavenly	 to	 live,	 the	 Suta	 drifted	 slowly	 into	 a
dreamless	sleep.

18	GRADUATION
WHEN	 DRONA	 ENTERED,	 THE	 ENTIRE	 ASSEMBLY	 rose	 in	 respect.	 Aswathama,	 who

accompanied	 his	 father,	 immediately	 moved	 towards	 Suyodhana,	 and	 Drona
fumed.	 The	 Guru	 walked	 over	 to	 Kunti,	 who	 folded	 her	 hands	 in	 obeisance.
Arjuna	fell	at	his	feet,	leaving	the	other	Pandava	brothers	to	jostle	for	the	Guru’s
favour.
Tenderly	lifting	Arjuna,	who	was	lying	prostrate	at	his	feet,	Drona	looked	at	the
handsome	face	of	the	Pandava	Prince.	What	he	would	not	give	to	have	a	son	like
Arjuna.	 Why	 could	 his	 own	 son	 not	 see	 the	 writing	 on	 the	 wall?	 The	 future
belonged	to	the	Pandavas.	It	would	be	wiser	to	attach	himself	to	the	winning	side.
It	 was	 evident	 in	 the	 way	 the	 Court	 had	 assembled.	 All	 the	 Priests,	 under
Dhaumya,	stood	with	the	Pandavas.	The	only	Brahmin	standing	with	the	Kauravas
was	the	cranky	Kripa,	who	was	a	special	invitee	of	the	Grand	Regent.	Perhaps,	as
Dhaumya	sometimes	said,	Bhishma	was	showing	signs	of	senility.	How	else	could
one	 account	 for	 the	 presence	 of	 Kripa	 in	 the	 Royal	 Assembly?	 One	 had	 only	 to
look	 at	 how	 the	 clown	 was	 conducting	 himself	 now	 –	 chatting	 with	 the	 minions
serving	 refreshments,	 cracking	 jokes,	 slapping	 his	 juniors	 in	 jest,	 and	 behaving
without	 any	 respect	 for	 the	 Court	 or	 the	 great	 men	 and	 women	 who	 graced	 it.
Drona	 could	 feel	the	 anger	 emanating	 from	 the	 Brahmins	 near	 Kunti.	 They	 were
fuming	at	this	open	flouting	of	the	taboos.	Kripa	waved	casually	when	he	caught
Drona’s	eye	and	even	had	the	audacity	to	bow	in	mock	deference.	It	took	all	the
self-control	 the	 Guru	 had	 mastered	 with	 his	 yogic	 practices	 to	 keep	 from
exploding	with	rage.
“Guru,	 years	 ago,	 a	 poor	 widow	 entrusted	 her	 boys	 to	 you	 and	 what	 noble	 men
you	have	made	them	into,”	Kunti	said	to	Drona,	her	hands	folded	in	humility	and
appreciation.
“Devi,	 the	 seed	 of	 goodness	 and	 nobility	 lay	 in	 their	 hearts.	 I	 was	 merely	 the
occasional	shower	that	helped	the	seeds	to	grow.	Today,	they	make	us	all	proud.	I
was	fortunate	to	have	disciples	like	them,”	the	Guru	replied	gracefully.	He	pulled
Arjuna	 towards	 him	 and	 looked	 at	 the	 tall	 young	 man	 smiling	 at	 him.	 Drona	 felt
something	tug	at	his	heartstrings.	How	he	wished	his	son	was	like	this	man	–	what

humility,	 what	 skill	 –	 he	 truly	 was	 the	 embodiment	 of	 perfection.	 Why	 did
Aswathama	 always	 argue	 against	 everything	 written	 in	 the	 Holy	 Scriptures	 and
befriend	 a	 no-gooder	 like	 Suyodhana?	 Arjuna,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 accepted
everything	 wise	 men	 like	 Dhaumya	 said,	 without	 questioning	 them,	 and	 had	 the
wisdom	 and	 humility	 to	 know	 that	 better	 men	 than	 he	 had	 written	 the	 scriptures
and	his	duty	was	merely	to	follow	them.
“You	promised	me	you	would	make	Arjuna	the	best	warrior	in	the	world,	Guru.
Today	 is	 the	 culmination	 of	 all	 our	 hopes	 and	 prayers.	 This	 poor	 widow	 will
forever	be	in	your	debt.”
“Devi,	have	no	doubt	your	sons	will	surpass	all	others	today.	Is	there	any	archer
in	India	who	can	rival	Arjuna?	Is	there	anyone	more	skilled	than	Yudhishtra	in	the
use	of	the	lance?	Bhima	will	show	you	how	one	can	combine	strength	and	skill.
That	lovable	rascal	is	going	to	make	the	arrogant	Suyodhana	look	a	fool.	Not	that
Suyodhana	 is	 bad	 with	 a	 mace,	 but	 who	 can	 beat	 your	 Bhima?	 Nakula	 and
Sahadeva	 are	 excellent	 swordsmen.	 Even	 I	 am	 afraid	 to	 oppose	 them.	 You	 have
been	 blessed	 with	 good	 sons	 and	 today	 you	 will	 see	 that	 my	 promise	 has	 been
well	kept,”	Drona	said.
When	Bhishma	entered	the	sabha	and	saw	the	young	faces	looking	up	at	him,	pride
swelled	 his	 heart.	 Today	 was	 an	 important	 day	 in	 the	 lives	 of	 the	 Princes.	 They
represented	 the	 future	 of	 Hastinapura.	 On	 his	 right,	 Yudhishtra	 and	 his	 brothers
stood	 in	 glittering	 splendour.	 To	 his	 left	 were	 the	 sons	 of	 Dhritarashtra,	 led	 by
Crown	 Prince	 Suyodhana.	 The	 King’s	 personal	 aide	 and	 scribe,	 Sanjaya,	 was
describing	 the	 wonderful	 scene	 to	 the	 blind	 Royal	 couple.	 Kunti,	 Dhaumya	 and
Drona	stood	together,	Bhishma	acknowledged	their	greetings.	His	saw	Suyodhana,
looking	 haughty	 and	 indifferent	 to	 the	 drama	 surrounding	 him,	 and	 the	 Grand
Regent	could	not	suppress	a	smile.
The	 murmuring	 in	 the	 sabha	 subsided	 and	 all	 eyes	 turned	 to	 Bhishma,	 standing
next	 to	 the	 King.	 He	 gazed	 at	 the	 assembly	 and	 then	 addressed	 the	 graduating
young	 men,	 brimming	 with	 energy	 and	 enthusiasm.	 “My	 sons,	 today	 is	 the	 most
important	 day	 of	 your	 life.	 Today	 you	 leave	 your	 childhood	 behind	 and	 become
men.	 You	 have	 completed	 your	 training	 under	 Guru	 Drona,	 and	 each	 of	 you	 is	 a
tribute	to	him.	Today,	Hastinapura,	and	the	whole	of	India,	looks	at	you	with	hope.
You	 are	 the	 future.	 Our	 country	 has	 faced	 many	 struggles	 and	 challenges	 in	 the
past,	but	it	is	the	youth	who	will	decide	the	path	India	will	take.	We	all	stand	here

with	optimism	in	our	hearts.	One	day,	Prince	Suyodhana	will	follow	his	father	as
King	of	our	ancient	land,	and	I	am	sure	Drona	has	inculcated	in	him	the	wisdom	to
take	 on	 that	 great	 responsibility.	 All	 of	 you	 will	 occupy	 important	 positions	 as
governors,	ministers,	military	chiefs,	administrators,	and	so	on.	I	know	you	are	at
an	age	that	resents	listening	to	advice,	but	unfortunately	I	am	at	an	age	that	relishes
giving	it.”
Bhishma	paused	as	everyone	laughed.	His	patrician	face	broke	into	a	smile.	“My
first	 piece	 of	 advice	 is	 that	 Graduation	 Day	 should	 not	 mean	 the	 end	 of	 your
learning.	Learning	is	a	continuous	process	and	your	training	has	merely	prepared
you	 for	 that	 never-ending	 journey.	 Learn	 from	 everyone,	 everywhere,	 and
everything.	Use	every	moment	to	do	so.	That	is	the	only	legacy	we	leave	behind
when	 the	 Great	 God	 of	 Time,	 calls	 us	 back	 to	 his	 abode.	 My	 second	 piece	 of
advice	is,	when	you	are	in	positions	of	power,	the	trappings	of	power	are	many
and	may	often	hinder	you	in	taking	the	right	decision.	When	your	mind	knows	not
what	 to	 do,	 here	 is	 a	 mantra	 for	 differentiating	 between	 right	 and	 wrong:	 any
decision	 you	 take	 will	 affect	 some	 people	 favourably	 and	 others	 unfavourably.
The	right	decision	is	always	based	on	the	greatest	common	good	and	not	in	favour
of	one	particular	group.”
Bhishma	paused	and	looked	 at	Dhaumya.	The	 Brahmin	 stared	back	coldly	at	the
Grand	Regent.	“I	wish	you	all	success.”	Bhishma	said	to	the	young	faces	looking
up	 at	 him,	 suddenly	 feeling	 his	 own	 youth	 returning,	 ignited	 by	 their	 burning
enthusiasm.	Bhishma	dramatically	drew	his	sword	and	raised	it	high.	“Sons	of	the
Kuru	race,	make	our	country	proud.	Show	the	world	what	fine	men	are	capable	of.
Your	fellow	citizens	await	you	in	the	arena	outside.	Welcome	to	the	future!”
Bhishma’s	rich,	deep	voice	boomed	over	the	assembly	and	electrified	the	sabha.
The	 sounds	 of	 conches,	 drums,	 horns	 and	 bugles	 sounded	 in	 joyous	 cacophony.
The	King	stood	and	the	guards	threw	open	the	huge	doors	of	the	sabha.	The	young
warriors	rushed	into	the	sun.
***

On	either	side	of	the	Royal	highway,	thronging	crowds	cheered	enthusiastically	as
noble	 men	 and	 women,	 Princes	 and	 dignitaries,	 in	 glittering	 chariots,	 or	 on
armoured	elephants	and	fine	horses,	rushed	towards	the	arena.	As	the	procession
entered	 the	 huge	 stadium,	 the	 multitude	 rose	 up	 in	 waves,	 like	 a	 giant	 monster

waking	 from	 slumber.	 The	 ear-splitting	 sounds	 of	 drums,	 conches	 and	 whistles
reverberated	in	the	air	as	the	dignitaries	took	their	seats.	The	Princes	rode	into	the
arena,	waving	to	the	crowd.	The	Grand	Ceremony	had	begun.
In	 the	 stands	 reserved	 for	 the	 Untouchables	 and	 lower	 castes,	 among	 the	 20,000
strong	 crowd,	 a	 dark	 youth	 sat	 impassively,	 without	 even	 blinking.	 The	 wildly
dancing	young	men	around	him	were	annoyed	at	the	way	he	sat	like	a	stone	amidst
their	revelry.	His	right	hand	lay	hidden	in	the	folds	of	his	dhoti.	The	physical	pain
when	 he	 had	 cut	 off	 his	 thumb	 at	 his	 Guru’s	 command	 had	 long	 gone,	 but	 the
wound	 in	 his	 mind	 refused	 to	 heal.	 The	 thumb	 still	 had	 a	 ghost	 presence	 in	 his
hand	and	Ekalavya	felt	the	pain	anew	whenever	he	let	his	mind	dwell	on	it.
Outside	 the	 majestic	 entrance	 to	 the	 arena,	 another	 young	 man	 sat	 among	 the
beggars	and	petty	vendors,	waiting	for	a	chance	to	enter.	It	would	have	been	easy
to	walk	into	the	gallery	but	he	needed	to	carry	his	weapons	in	and	that	created	a
problem.	The	security	arrangements	were	thorough.	The	guards	were	confiscating
any	weapons	carried	by	the	spectators.	Karna	knew	this	was	his	final	chance.	He
had	to	get	into	the	arena	with	his	bow	and	quiver	of	arrows	at	any	cost.	Jara	sat
contentedly	with	Dharma,	watching	the	crowds.	As	a	beggar,	he	was	not	allowed
inside.	But	he	had	no	complaints.	Life	was	as	good	in	the	street	as	it	was	inside
the	 arena,	 where	 men	 would	 compete	 for	 glory	 and	 prepare	 for	 the	 wars	 they
would	fight	in	the	future.	Every	time	a	cheer	rose	from	within,	Karna	tensed.	Jara
patted	him,	telling	him	to	trust	in	God.	He	would	not	let	him	down.	After	a	while,
the	 beggar’s	 constant	 implorations	 irritated	 Karna’s	 already	 tense	 mind	 and	 he
snapped	at	Jara	to	keep	quiet.	Jara	smiled	at	the	ambitious	young	man,	but	did	not
forget	to	place	a	consoling	hand	on	Karna’s	shoulder.
Inside	the	arena,	the	disciples	of	Guru	Drona	held	the	galleries	captivated	by	their
spectacular	 display	 of	 equestrian	 and	 martial	 skills.	 As	 each	 Prince	 performed,
the	 spectators	 cheered	 enthusiastically,	 while	 the	 Guru	 sat	 haughtily	 in	 his	 seat,
indifferent	to	the	wonder	of	the	crowd.	What	else	did	they	expect	from	disciples
of	Drona?	He	waited	for	Bhima	to	take	on	Suyodhana,	and	then	the	mesmerizing
display	of	archery	he	was	sure	Arjuna	would	put	up.
Near	 Drona,	 Aswathama	 sat	 in	 despair.	 His	 father	 had	 prohibited	 him	 from
bringing	along	his	bow	and	arrows.	When	Aswathama	had	pleaded	with	his	father
to	 allow	 him	 to	 participate	 in	 the	 Grand	 Ceremony,	 Drona	 had	 shouted	 that	 the
ceremony	was	only	for	 the	Princes	of	Hastinapura.	 Aswathama	had	 retorted	that

the	 Guru	 was	 choking	 his	 own	 son’s	 talent,	 but	 Drona	 had	 not	 given-in.
Aswathama	had	acidly	remarked	that	his	father	was	afraid	Arjuna	would	lose	to
him.	 The	 remark	 angered	 Drona,	 carrying	 as	 it	 did	 the	 weight	 of	 truth,	 and	 he
slapped	 his	 son.	 Aswathama	 left	 the	 room	 disheartened,	 leaving	 Drona	 feeling
guilty	 over	 what	 he	 had	 done.	 He	 kept	 an	 eye	 on	 his	 son	 now	 and	 was	 secretly
happy	he	was	sitting	near	him	instead	of	keeping	Suyodhana	company.
***

Karna	got	his	chance	when	the	duel	between	Suyodhana	and	Bhima	began.	With
the	guards	busy	cheering	for	one	Prince	or	the	other,	 Karna	quietly	sneaked	into
the	 arena.	 The	 stadium	 was	 packed	 to	 capacity	 but	 a	 villager	 moved	 a	 little	 to
allow	Karna	to	sit	down.	He	looked	at	Karna’s	bow	and	frowned.	Karna	ignored
the	 stares	 around	 him	 and	 tried	 to	 remain	 as	 inconspicuous	 as	 possible	 as	 he
watched	the	duel	between	the	two	Princes.
Bhima	 towered	 over	 Suyodhana	 by	 a	 foot.	 He	 was	 all	 bulk	 and	 muscle	 and	 the
heavy	 mace	 looked	 like	 a	 mere	 stick	 in	 his	 huge	 hands.	 He	 stood	 with	 his	 legs
spread	apart	in	combat	position,	wielding	his	mace	with	ease,	taunting	Suyodhana
and	 trying	 to	 make	 him	 angry.	 Dhaumya	 was	 leading	 a	 group	 of	 Brahmins	 in
cheering	 for	 Bhima.	 The	 majority	 of	 the	 common	 people	 were	 familiar	 with	 the
Crown	 Prince,	 as	 he	 often	 visited	 their	 dwellings	 and	 was	 seen	 on	 the	 streets.
They	wanted	their	Prince	to	win.	However,	given	the	disparity	in	the	size	of	the
combatants,	there	was	an	uneasy	silence.	The	gallery	held	 more	people	from	the
villages	and	countryside	than	the	city	itself,	and	for	them,	Bhima	was	the	hero	and
Suyodhana	the	arrogant	Prince.	That	was	what	the	bards	kept	singing	about	in	their
villages	and	they	had	no	reason	to	disbelieve	it.	They	were	too	naïve	to	know	that
the	 bards	 sang	 in	 praise	 of	 anyone	 who	 paid	 them	 well.	 The	 Truth	 was	 both
malleable	and	for	sale.
Suyodhana	scanned	the	seats	of	the	dignitaries	to	find	those	lovely	eyes	amongst
them.	 When	 he	 saw	 her,	 his	 heart	 leapt	 with	 joy.	 He	 raised	 his	 mace	 to	 her.
Subhadra	 stood	 up	 from	 her	 seat	 and	 waved.	 When	 the	 first	 blow	 came	 from
Bhima,	 Suyodhana	 realized	 this	 was	 not	 a	 demonstration	 duel.	 Death	 danced	 in
Bhima’s	 mace,	 following	 Suyodhana’s	 every	 step.	 The	 big	 Pandava	 attacked
Suyodhana	like	a	mad	elephant	and	the	cheering	from	the	nobles	grew	louder.	The
poorer	 sections	 of	 the	 gallery	 maintained	 an	 uneasy	 silence	 initially	 but	 soon
began	cheering	for	Bhima,	imitating	their	social	superiors;	sure,	the	Crown	Prince

would	fall.	Suyodhana	was	fighting	a	losing	battle.	He	felt	alone,	with	the	whole
world	willing	his	defeat.
Bhima	kept	attacking	with	murderous	intent.	None	of	the	elders	interfered	to	stop
it.	Everyone	anticipated	Suyodhana’s	defeat.	Dhaumya’s	group	of	Brahmins	were
delirious	 with	 joy.	 At	 any	 moment,	 Suyodhana	 would	 fall	 and	 his	 claim	 to	 the
throne	 of	 Hastinapura	 would	 be	 weakened	 after	 such	 a	 public	 defeat,	 even	 if	 he
escaped	 alive.	 The	 path	 of	 the	 darling	 of	 the	 conservatives;	 Yudhishtra,	 was
opening	 up	 rapidly.	 The	 nobles	 too,	 waited	 for	 the	 inevitable	 fall	 of	 the	 Crown
Prince.	However,	Suyodhana	refused	to	 give	up.	With	grit	 and	determination,	he
fought	back.	Imperceptibly,	the	tide	began	shifting	against	the	Pandava.	Suyodhana
remembered	the	advice	of	his	mentor	Balarama,	about	fighting	for	a	bigger	cause
than	individual	ego,	and	his	blows	started	getting	deadlier.
Defying	 the	 wishes	 of	 the	 holy	 men,	 the	 son	 of	 a	 blind	 man	 fought	 with	 passion
against	a	man	of	superior	strength	and	divine	lineage.	The	turn	of	events	was	more
than	the	group	of	Brahmins,	who	had	branded	the	self-willed	Suyodhana	 as	evil
incarnate,	could	digest.	They	looked	at	Krishna	for	solace	but	there	was	only	the
usual	 smile	 on	 the	 Yadava’s	 handsome	 face.	 The	 cheering	 began	 to	 die	 down
amongst	 the	 nobility	 and	 the	 Brahmins.	 But,	 from	 the	 gallery	 where	 the	 common
people	 sat,	 the	 noise	 picked	 up	 and	 the	 cheering	 for	 Suyodhana	 soon	 became
deafening.	 The	 Priests	 could	 not	 believe	 their	 eyes.	 All	 their	 efforts	 to	 plant
stories	about	the	Crown	Prince	over	the	years,	was	going	to	waste.	They	had	to	do
something	before	the	villain	became	a	hero	of	the	masses.
Drona	sat	watching	the	scene	in	horror.	He	could	feel	the	accusing	eyes	of	Kunti
boring	into	his	back.	He	had	failed	in	his	promise.
“Stop	it	somehow,”	Dhaumya	hissed	into	Drona’s	ear.
The	 Guru	 hesitated	 a	 moment,	 looking	 towards	 Krishna	 for	 guidance.	 Then	 he
stood	 up	 and	 walked	 towards	 the	 ring,	 commanding	 the	 duel	 to	 stop.	 Suyodhana
ignored	the	Guru	and	continued	to	press	his	advantage.	“Bhima,	throw	away	your
mace!”	Drona	shouted.
The	giant	Pandava	blinked	uncomprehendingly	at	first.	When	the	command	finally
dawned	on	him,	he	flung	away	his	mace	and	stood	unarmed	in	front	of	his	angry
opponent.	 Suyodhana’s	 mace	 stopped	 a	 few	 inches	 in	 front	 of	 Bhima’s	 skull.

Drona	had	assessed	Suyodhana’s	character	correctly.	He	knew	the	 Crown	Prince
would	never	hit	a	disarmed	opponent.	The	nobles	heaved	a	sigh	of	relief.	Drona
chided	the	Prince	for	forgetting	this	was	just	a	friendly	duel	and	not	a	battlefield.
Suyodhana	 remained	 silent.	 He	 knew	 it	 was	 useless	 to	 defend	 himself.	 He	 just
kept	 staring	 at	 his	 Guru,	 his	 head	 held	 high,	 until	 Drona	 exhausted	 himself.	 The
entire	 gallery	 watched	 as	 Bhima	 went	 towards	 his	 grim	 faced	 mother,	 while
Suyodhana	walked	away,	alone.
“Disgusting!”	 A	 voice	 from	 the	 Untouchables	 stand	 pierced	 the	 air.	 Every	 eye
turned	towards	Ekalavya.	The	unthinkable	was	happening	–	 an	 Untouchable	was
airing	his	opinion	aloud	regarding	a	Guru.	There	were	protests	from	the	Brahmins
stand	and	many	shouted	to	the	King	and	the	Grand	Regent	to	catch	the	scoundrel
and	 teach	 him	 a	 lesson	 for	 his	 impudence.	 Bhishma’s	 face	 was	 stony	 and
Dhritarashtra	 sat	 immobile	 in	 his	 seat.	 Kripa’s	 mocking	 laughter,	 following	 the
Nishada’s	 comment,	 did	 not	 make	 things	 easier	 for	 the	 nobles	 and	 Priests.
Something	 significant	 had	 to	 be	 done;	 or	 else,	 things	 would	 spin	 out	 of	 their
control.
“Arjuna!”	 Kunti	 cried	 out.	 The	 Priests	 took	 their	 cue	 and	 began	 chanting	 the
middle	 Pandava’s	 name.	 Suddenly,	 hope	 lit	 their	 faces.	 If	 anybody	 could	 change
this	situation,	it	was	the	great	archer.
Drona	stood	up	to	announce	his	favourite	student.	“Citizens	of	Hastinapura,	what
you	have	seen	thus	far	is	nothing	compared	to	what	you	are	about	to	see.”	Drona
paused	for	effect,	looking	around.	In	a	thundering	voice	he	announced,	“Behold!
The	greatest	archer	in	the	world,	ARJUNAA…”
A	 golden	 chariot,	 drawn	 by	 the	 finest	 horses,	 entered	 the	 stadium	 and	 drove
around	it	at	great	speed.	In	it,	Arjuna	stood	like	a	God.	He	looked	so	handsome
and	noble	in	his	expensive	silken	clothing	and	glittering	jewels,	that	many	young
women	 gazed	 at	 him	 with	 lust	 and	 love.	 As	 he	 sped	 around	 below	 the	 stand	 of
dignitaries,	 he	 shot	 a	 number	 of	 arrows	 with	 great	 dexterity,	 each	 landing	 at	 the
feet	 of	 a	 nobleman,	 as	 an	 offering.	 It	 was	 the	 archer’s	 salute,	 an	 impossibly
impressive	 feat.	 He	 shot	 an	 arrow	 carrying	 a	 garland	 towards	 the	 flag	 of
Hastinapura.	 The	 arrow	 whisked	 past,	 garlanding	 the	fluttering	 flag.	 The	 crowd
rose	 in	 thunderous	 applause.	 Then	 Arjuna	 shot	 at	 the	 targets	 placed	 at	 various
distances,	 with	 grace	 and	 poise.	 The	 crowd	 was	 enraptured.	 They	 had	 forgotten
the	duel	between	Suyodhana	and	Bhima.	Arjuna	had	saved	the	day	for	the	nobles.

The	 proud	 Guru	 turned	 to	 Kunti.	 “Devi,	 I	 have	 kept	 my	 promise.”	 Before	 Kunti
could	 express	 her	 gratitude,	 an	 arrow	 fell	 at	 Drona’s	 feet.	 Surprised,	 the	 Guru
looked	at	his	favourite	student	but	the	chariot	with	Arjuna	was	no	longer	moving.
Another	 young	 man	 stood	 before	 the	 still	 chariot	 with	 drawn	 bowstring.	 With
surprising	 quickness	 of	 aim,	 he	 shot	 arrow	 upon	 arrow,	 performing	 the	 difficult
archer’s	salute.	The	arrows	fell	at	the	feet	of	the	nobles.	With	an	ease	and	grace
that	bordered	on	arrogance,	the	young	man	effortlessly	mimicked	Arjuna’s	feat.
Arjuna	jumped	down	from	his	chariot,	stung	by	the	challenge,	and	began	shooting
at	the	most	distant	targets.	Unfortunately,	for	the	noble	Prince,	his	challenger	began
hitting	each	target	before	Arjuna	could	even	place	his	arrow	on	his	bowstring.	The
mesmerized	crowd	began	cheering	the	unknown	archer.	The	contrast	between	the
two	 contestants	 could	 not	 have	 been	 starker.	 Arjuna	 stood	 in	 the	 magnificent
costume	of	the	aristocratic	Kshatriya,	with	glistening	gold	jewellery	and	diamond
studded	 headgear,	 holding	 his	 gold-plated	 bow.	 He	 looked	 like	 a	 God	 just
descended	 from	 the	 heavens.	 His	 challenger	 stood	 in	 his	 tattered	 clothes,
bareheaded	and	barefooted,	as	if	he	had	just	come	off	the	street;	a	poor	bastard	of
low	caste.	He	could	have	been	any	one	of	the	faces	in	the	gallery	–	an	insignificant
and	irrelevant	common	man.
Panic	gripped	the	aristocrats	once	again.	Kunti	felt	faint.	The	nobles	were	angered
by	 such	 a	 brazen	 display	 by	 a	 commoner.	 They	 turned	 on	 the	 hapless	 astrologer
who	 had	 fixed	 this	 particular	 date	 as	 auspicious	 for	 the	 Grand	 Ceremony.	 The
stars	seemed	to	be	conspiring	against	the	Princes.	Drona	walked	into	 the	middle
once	again.	He	saw	Arjuna’s	hands	were	shaking	and	he	was	making	mistakes	in
his	panic.	The	silken	clothes	of	the	greatest	archer	in	the	world	were	soaked	with
sweat,	 whereas	 his	 challenger	 stood	 poised	 and	 calm,	 shooting	 arrows	 in	 an
endless	flow.
“Stop!”	shouted	Drona.	Both	young	men	dropped	their	arms.	Turning	towards	him,
they	bowed.	Drona	asked	the	ill-clad	young	man	in	a	voice	dripping	with	sarcasm,
“This	ceremony	is	for	Princes.	May	I	know	which	kingdom	your	father	rules?”
The	loud	laughter	from	the	stands	resounded	like	thunder	in	the	young	 warrior’s
ears.	 Arjuna	 breathed	 a	 sigh	 of	 relief.	 Before	 the	 stranger	 could	 answer,	 an	 old
man	 came	 running	 onto	 the	 ground	 shouting	 in	 joy,	 “Karna!	 My	 son!	 You	 have
come	 back…”	 Athiratha	 rushed	 to	 hug	 the	 son	 he	 had	 not	 seen	 for	 years,	 but
stopped	 short	 when	 he	 saw	 the	 humiliation	 on	 Karna’s	 face.	 With	 pain,	 the	 old

charioteer	 saw	 that	 Karna	 was	 ashamed	 of	 his	 father.	 He	 wished	 his	 son	 would
raise	his	head	and	look	at	him.	He	prayed	that	his	son	would	run	to	him	as	he	had
as	a	little	boy.	But	Karna	stood	with	his	eyes	fixed	to	the	ground.	Like	a	chastised
dog,	the	old	man	walked	back	into	the	crowd	and	disappeared.
“A	Suta!”	Drona	laughed	aloud.
The	 stands	 shook	 with	 the	 laughter	 of	 the	 aristocrats.	 The	 smile	 returned	 to
Arjuna’s	handsome	face	as	he	wiped	the	sweat	from	his	brow.
Dhaumya	smiled	at	last.	This	was	his	domain.	He	walked	into	the	ground	and	said
clearly,	“You	low	caste	filth,	why	don’t	you	go	and	clean	the	stables?”	He	looked
at	 the	 stands	 and	 joined	 in	 the	 laughter	 that	 followed.	 “Son	 of	 a	 charioteer…”
Dhaumya	stared	at	Karna	as	recognition	dawned	on	him.	“Son	of	Athiratha…	You
are	the	man	all	of	India	has	been	hunting	for	over	the	past	few	days.	Ha	ha	ha,	the
long	arm	of	dharma	has	finally	caught	up	with	you,	Suta.	You	think	you	can	escape
after	insulting	Guru	Parashurama?	You	are	finished.”
A	murmur	of	recognition	went	through	the	crowd.	Prince	Shakuni,	sitting	amongst
the	dignitaries,	cursed	himself.	The	opportunity	to	bring	the	Southern	Confederate
and	Hastinapura	to	war	had	been	lost.	Blast	that	incompetent	Durjaya.	‘Why	do	I
waste	my	money	on	that	idiot?’	he	thought	bitterly.	Now	the	Suta	would	be	handed
over	 to	 the	 Confederate	 and	 the	 relationship	 between	 the	 two	 powerful	 forces
would	return	to	the	status	quo.
Karna	knew	his	story	had	ended	when	his	father	came	running	towards	him.	‘Why
did	he	have	to	do	that?	I	would	have	gone	to	him	after	the	event,	after	the	world
understood	 I	 am	 a	 better	 archer	 than	 Arjuna.	 Now	 I	 stand	 insulted	 before	 all
because	 of	 my	 foolish	 father.	 Little	 does	 he	 know	 he	 has	 signed	 my	 death
warrant.”
A	 strong	 hand	 grasped	 Karna’s	 wrist.	 He	 looked	 up.	 It	 was	 Crown	 Prince,
Suyodhana.	He	smiled	at	the	son	of	the	charioteer,	and	then	took	his	sword	from
its	 sheath	 and	 raised	 it	 to	 the	 sky.	 In	 a	 calm	 and	 clear	 voice,	 he	 spoke	 to	 the
crowd.	 “Are	 we	 not	 ashamed	 to	 ask	 the	 caste	 of	 a	 warrior?	 Do	 we	 have	 the
tradition	 of	 seeking	 the	 origin	 of	 rivers	 or	 brave	 men?	 Why	 should	 it	 matter	 if
Karna’s	father	is	a	charioteer?	Or	is	Prince	Arjuna	afraid	to	lose	to	one	better	than
he?”	 Suyodhana	 turned	 to	 his	 cousin.	 “Arjuna,	 if	 you	 are	 a	 man	 and	 a	 warrior,

accept	 the	 challenge	 and	 beat	 the	 Suta	 instead	 of	 hiding	 behind	 these	 stupid
beliefs.”
Drona	stopped	Suyodhana.	“Enough	of	your	arrogance,	Prince!	You	have	crossed
the	bounds	of	propriety.	I	am	ashamed	to	call	you	my	disciple.”
Suyodhana	 ignored	 Drona	 and	 continued	 to	 stare	 at	 Arjuna.	 In	 the	 gallery,
Ekalavya	held	his	breath.	Arjuna	turned	helplessly	towards	Dhaumya,	who	looked
confused.	 Arjuna	 then	 looked	 at	 his	 friend,	 Krishna,	 and	 found	 the	 courage	 to
answer	his	cousin.	“Suyodhana,	I	will	not	fight	a	low	caste	Suta.	I	am	a	Prince	of
Hastinapura,”	he	declared	haughtily.
“If	you	are	a	Prince,	you	will	fight	a	King	now,”	retorted	Suyodhana.	He	shouted
to	 the	 crowd,	 “My	 countrymen,	 you	 are	 about	 to	 witness	 something	 unique.”
Suyodhana	turned	towards	the	Grand	Regent	and	the	King.	“Your	Excellency,	Your
Highness,	 with	 your	 gracious	 permission...”	 Suyodhana	 addressed	 the	 group	 of
Brahmins	saying,	“What	I	am	about	to	do	is	in	the	exalted	traditions	of	the	Vedas.	I
wish	to	call	for	a	real	Brahmin,	one	who	understands	the	scriptures	as	they	were
written.”
The	 entire	 crowd	 of	 Priests	 stood	 up	 and	 began	 shouting	 at	 the	 Crown	 Prince.
Kripa	ran	towards	the	beleaguered	Prince,	laughing.	Drona	could	not	believe	his
eyes	 when	 his	 son	 Aswathama	 followed	 Kripa.	 Karna	 found	 himself	 crushed	 in
Kripa’s	 bear	 hug.	 Aswathama	 smiled	 at	 Suyodhana	 and	 stood	 beside	 him,	 his
strong	arms	crossed	over	his	broad	chest.	Dhaumya	begged	the	Grand	Regent	to
stop	 Suyodhana	 from	 insulting	 the	 Holy	 Scriptures	 and	 holy	 men,	 but	 Bhishma’s
face	remained	expressionless.	A	nervous	Vidhura	attempted	to	pacify	the	agitated
Brahmins,	but	 he	 was	ignored.	Shakuni	rubbed	his	palms	together	in	 excitement.
Things	were	turning	out	much	better	than	he	had	expected.	If	he	played	his	cards
right,	he	could	develop	this	into	something	much	bigger	and	more	violent	than	he
had	 hoped.	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 holy	 men,	 vehemently	 trying	 to	 protect	 their	 selfish
interests	by	denying	even	basic	dignity	to	the	majority	of	the	people,	and	smiled...
Suyodhana	 raised	 his	 voice	 again.	 This	 time	 he	 addressed	 the	 assembled	 Kings.
“Great	 Kings	 of	 India,	 most	 of	 you	 have	 inherited	 your	 kingdoms.	 But	 here	 is
someone	 truly	 deserving	 of	 becoming	 a	 Kshatriya.	 Please	 come	 forward	 and
strengthen	my	purpose.”

An	impenetrable	silence	followed	as	the	Kings	gazed	back	stonily.	No	one	moved.
Then	 one	 of	 them	 stood	 up	 slowly.	 With	 deliberate	 steps,	 he	 walked	 towards
Suyodhana.	Bowing	to	the	Prince	he	said,	“I	am	Jayadratha,	King	of	Sindh.	You
are	doing	the	right	thing	and	can	count	on	my	support.	It	is	a	privilege	to	befriend	a
man	like	you,	if	you	will	accept	my	hand	in	friendship.”
Suyodhana	 smiled	 at	 his	 lone	 supporter	 among	 the	 Kings	 and	 grasped	 the	 hand
held	 out	 to	 him	 in	 a	 firm	 grip.	 The	 crowd	 waited	 with	 baited	 breath.	 Karna
watched	as	Suyodhana	turned	towards	the	overflowing	gallery.
“My	countrymen,	I	have	a	dream.	Perhaps	some	of	you	may	say	it	is	an	impossible
dream.	Yet,	it	is	beautiful.	I	see	a	tomorrow	where	all	barriers	will	crumble	and
we	 will	 live	 in	 a	 free	 world.	 I	 see	 a	 future	 where	 we	 stop	 asking	 people	 about
their	 caste	 and	 treat	 each	 other	 as	 equals.	 I	 see	 my	 country	breaking	free	 of	 the
grip	of	irrational	beliefs	and	superstitions.	I	see	a	tomorrow	where	there	will	be
no	limits	placed	on	what	one	can	achieve.	The	accident	of	birth	will	not	stand	in
the	way	of	achievement.
“This	 young	 man	 is	 proof	 that	 talent	 knows	 no	 caste.	 There	 are	 forces	 in	 our
society	 that	 want	 to	 cloister	 everything,	 corner	 every	 privilege,	 and	 treat	 others
like	dust	under	their	feet.	This	man	is	hunted	by	the	great	kingdoms	of	the	South.
But	what	was	his	crime?	He	wanted	to	learn.	Now,	Parashurama’s	followers	want
us	to	punish	a	man	for	daring	to	dream;	to	insult	him	for	not	being	born	into	a	high
caste.	Is	this	the	right	thing	to	do?	Have	we	ever	paused	to	think	what	will	happen
to	 this	 land	 if	 we	 keep	 denying	 knowledge	 to	 everyone?	 The	 majority	 live	 in
ignorance	and	poverty.	A	few	decide	who	is	pure	and	who	is	not.	Which	are	the
scriptures	 these	 people	 quote?	 Why	 are	 they	 afraid	 to	 let	 everyone	 learn	 the
Vedas?	 Are	 they	 afraid	 that	 people	 will	 then	 see	 that	 most	 of	 the	 taboos	 and
inhuman	 practises	 they	 advise	 have	 no	 sanction	 in	 the	 holy	 books?	 Where	 are
these	people	leading	our	country?	Has	the	time	not	come	to	say	–	enough!”
Suyodhana	paused	and	took	a	deep	breath.	The	arena	waited	in	anticipation.	“As
the	 Crown	 Prince	 of	 Hastinapura,	 I	 can	 only	 make	 you	 one	 promise.	 I	 will	 not
allow	Parashurama	and	his	cronies	to	win	in	our	land.	More	than	that,	I	wish	to
see	our	compatriots	of	the	Southern	Confederate	free	of	the	clutches	of	men	who
destroy	 our	 religion	 and	 culture	 in	 the	 name	 of	 dharma.	 Today,	 on	 this	 day	 of
graduation,	I	have	come	of	age	and	this	is	my	promise	to	you,	my	beloved	people.
Every	moment	of	my	life,	I	will	strive	to	wipe	out	hunger,	ignorance	and	pain.	My

dreams	have	the	sanction	of	our	holy	books.	May	Lord	Mahadeva	strengthen	my
arms.	I	will	strive	with	my	last	breath	to	wipe	out	the	curse	of	hunger,	caste	and
inequality	 which	 is	 spreading	 from	 the	 Himalayas	 in	 the	 far	 North	 to	 where	 the
three	seas	meet	in	the	Deep	South.	This	is	my	dream,	my	promise,	my	dharma.”
There	 was	 utter	 silence	 from	 the	 20,000-strong	 crowd.	 Then	 an	 unseen	 hand
seemed	to	lift	them	as	one	body.	Their	cheers	rose	towards	the	heavens	as	the	sun
tinted	their	faces	saffron.
As	Karna	watched	the	Crown	Prince,	his	eyes	filled	with	tears,	Suyodhana	made
the	historic	announcement.	“My	countrymen,	after	thousands	of	years,	witness	the
coronation	 of	 a	 King,	 based	 only	 on	 merit.	 I	 give	 away	 my	 inheritance	 of	 the
prosperous	 Anga	 country	 in	 the	 East	 of	 our	 great	 land,	 to	 my	 friend,	 Karna.	 His
being	 a	 Suta	 is	 incidental.	 From	 today,	 he	 will	 be	 known	 as	 Anga	 Raja,	 in
recognition	of	his	merit	as	a	man.”
A	 shocked	 silence	 followed	 before	 the	 ranks	 of	 the	 Priests	 exploded	 in	 rage.	 A
few	tried	to	run	onto	the	ground,	pulling	out	hidden	daggers,	but	they	were	stopped
in	 their	 tracks	 by	 Prince	 Sushasana.	 The	 Kaurava	 brothers	 formed	 a	 protective
ring	around	the	Crown	Prince	 and	the	stadium	erupted	into	thunderous	applause,
much	to	the	discomfiture	of	the	conservatives.
“Let	the	coronation	ceremony	begin	for	Anga	Raja,”	Suyodhana	ordered.
***

In	the	stands,	Ekalavya	stood	up	with	a	heavy	heart.	His	ghost	thumb	twitched	as
he	fought	to	control	his	tears.	After	sacrificing	his	thumb	on	the	altar	of	caste,	he
had	 cursed	 the	 country	 he	 had	 the	 misfortune	 to	 be	 born	 in.	 Now,	 witnessing
Karna’s	sudden	turn	of	fortune,	he	felt	the	bitterness	of	his	loss	intensify.	‘I	could
have	been	in	Karna’s	place	had	Drona	not	cheated	me	of	my	future,’	the	Nishada
thought.	He	could	not	sit	and	watch	Karna	become	a	King,	and	walked	out	of	the
stadium.
As	 Ekalavya	 left,	 Jara	 saw	 him	 and	 cried	 out,	 “Brother…”	 Lost	 in	 a	 morass	 of
self-pity,	the	Nishada	did	not	have	ears	for	the	beggar.	He	absently	threw	the	loose
change	he	had	towards	Jara	and	without	looking	at	him,	continued	walking.	As	the
noise	from	the	stadium	grew	fainter,	hope	sprouted	again	in	the	wounded	mind	of

Ekalavya.
A	Prince	had	dared	challenge	the	system.	Perhaps	the	future	would	belong	to	him.
Perhaps	this	country	was	not	as	bad	as	he	had	imagined	if	she	had	given	birth	to
one	such	as	Suyodhana.	‘Why	should	the	lack	of	a	thumb	stand	in	the	way	of	my
dreams?’	the	Nishada	wondered,	and	took	a	fateful	decision.	He	ran	to	where	his
bow	 lay	 gathering	 dust.	 Picking	 it	 up	 gently,	 he	 began	 practising	 again.	 Perhaps,
even	without	a	thumb,	he	could	best	Arjuna.
***

Inside	 the	 arena,	 things	 were	 getting	 out	 of	 control	 as	 far	 as	 the	 Priests	 were
concerned.	 Thick	 clouds	 had	 covered	 the	 sun	 and	 lightning	 zigzagged	 across	 the
heavens	 in	 crazy	 patterns.	 But	 nothing	 could	 silence	 the	 chants	 that	 rose	 from
20,000	 throats.	 Dhaumya	 and	 his	 group	 watched	 in	 horror	 as	 Kripa	 and
Aswathama	flouted	the	most	sacred	rules	of	the	smritis	 and	 did	 the	 unthinkable.
As	 the	 Suta	 was	 anointed	 King	 and	 a	 Kshatriya,	 which	 itself	 was	 a	 blatant
transgression	of	the	caste	rules,	Kripa	and	Aswathama	chanted	the	most	sacred	of
all	mantras	–	the	Gayatri	–	before	all.	Did	the	fools	not	know	it	had	to	be	kept
secret?	 That	 no	 ears	 other	 than	 those	 of	 a	 Brahmin,	 could	 hear	 it?	 Did	 not	 the
smritis	say	that	molten	lead	had	to	be	poured	into	the	ears	of	Shudras	or	women
who	 heard	 it,	 even	 accidentally?	 Who	 would	 control	 that	 crazy	 Kripa	 and	 the
foolish	son	of	Guru	Drona,	who	were	even	now	chanting	the	sacred	mantra	aloud
and	 urging	 the	 crowd	 to	 chant	 it	 after	 them?	 Dhaumya	 squirmed	 as	 the	 air
thundered	with	the	holy	Gayatri	mantra	being	repeated	by	thousands	of	men	and
women	of	all	castes,	creeds	and	colour.
And	so,	Karna	officially	became	King	of	Anga;	the	first	Shudra	to	be	thus	elevated
in	 many	 centuries.	 With	 that	 one	 bold	 act,	 Suyodhana	 burnt	 the	 last	 bridge
connecting	 him	 to	 the	 conservatives.	 Dhaumya	 was	 determined	 that	 the	 evil	 that
had	arisen	in	the	form	of	Suyodhana,	had	to	be	eliminated	at	any	cost.	The	future
of	India	and	the	protection	of	dharma	depended	on	it.	He	looked	at	 Krishna	for
solace	but	the	Yadava	was	looking	at	Kunti.
Krishna	 watched	 servants	 help	 his	 aunt	 leave	 the	 arena.	 He	 shook	 his	 head.
Yudhishtra	had	forfeited	a	golden	opportunity.	Suyodhana	had	outwitted	everyone
with	 his	 masterly	 move	 of	 making	 the	 talented	 Suta	 his	 friend.	 If	 the	 eldest
Pandava	had	had	any	sense,	 he	 would	 have	 done	 what	 Suyodhana	 had	 done	 and

gained	a	formidable	warrior	as	his	friend.	‘How	will	I	drive	any	sense	into	these
fools?’	he	wondered.	Why	had	Kunti	fainted?	Something	did	not	add	up.	Krishna
watched	the	coronation	of	the	Suta	with	a	smile.	The	game	was	getting	tougher	and
he	was	loving	it.	He	looked	at	Subhadra	and	saw	that	his	sister’s	eyes	were	not
fixed	 upon	 Suyodhana.	 Those	 dove-like	 eyes	 were	 brimming	 with	 tears	 at	 the
image	of	the	forgotten	Arjuna,	standing	to	one	side,	ignored	by	everyone.	Slowly	a
plan	started	forming	in	Krishna’s	mind.
“Suyodhana	 should	 not	 have	 insulted	 Arjuna	 like	 that.	 Why	 did	 he	 elevate	 an
unworthy	man?”	Subhadra	asked	her	brother.
“Let	us	go,”	said	Krishna,	taking	his	sister’s	hand.
***

Outside	 the	 stadium,	 Jara	 fiddled	 with	 the	 copper	 coins	 Ekalavya	 had	 thrown,
thinking	 sadly	 that	 Ekalavya	 had	 not	 even	 bothered	 to	 look	 at	 him.	 He	 saw	 a
dejected	Athiratha	walking	towards	his	hut	and	called	out	to	him.	The	charioteer
did	not	turn.	Immersed	in	his	own	worries	about	how	to	break	the	news	of	their
son’s	 return	 to	 his	 wife,	 he	 did	 not	 hear	 the	 beggar’s	 call.	 How	 would	 he	 tell	 a
mother	 that	 her	 son	 had	 become	 a	 King,	 but	 had	 not	 even	 looked	 at	 his	 father’s
face?	Jara	gazed	at	the	fading	figure	and	cried,	“Oh	Krishna,	why	do	you	try	the
poor	and	humble	in	this	way?”	Jara	heard	the	waves	of	an	unknown	chant	coming
from	 the	 stadium.	 He	 suddenly	 felt	 hungry	 and	 handed	 over	 a	 coin	 to	 a	 food
vendor,	 who	 gave	 him	 a	 banana	 leaf.	 Since	 he	 was	 an	 Untouchable,	 the	 food
would	 be	 served	 on	 the	 leaf,	 which	 was	 placed	 in	 a	 hole	 in	 the	 ground.	 Jara
waited	for	the	food	to	arrive.	Dharma	too,	sat	patiently,	occasionally	wagging	his
tail	and	licking	Jara’s	face.	Jara	did	not	mind	the	rain	that	had	started	falling	and
waited	for	quite	some	time	before	the	food	vendor	finally	spooned	boiled	rice	into
the	hole.	Jara	closed	his	eyes	to	offer	his	customary	thanks	to	Krishna	for	the	food.
At	exactly	that	moment,	a	chariot	sped	past	at	great	speed,	splashing	dirty	water
from	 a	 puddle.	 When	 Jara	 opened	 his	 eyes,	 he	 almost	 cried.	 The	 food	 was
splattered	with	stinking	water	and	no	longer	edible.	He	could	only	see	the	back	of
the	vanishing	chariot	and	the	silhouette	of	a	man	with	a	peacock	feather	in	his	hair,
and	a	woman	beside	him.	“Why	do	you	show	food	to	a	hungry	man,	only	to	take	it
away?	Don’t	you	have	any	mercy,	my	Lord?”	cried	the	hungry	beggar.

Later,	when	the	crowd	emptied	out	of	the	stadium,	Jara	was	pleasantly	surprised
to	 see	 Karna	 riding	 with	 the	 Crown	 Prince.	 He	 wished	 Karna	 well,	 as	 though	 a
beggar’s	goodwill	mattered	in	this	land	of	Gods.	When	he	checked	to	see	whether
the	 dirty	 water	 had	 drained	 from	 his	 bowl	 of	 rice,	 he	 found	 a	 trail	 of	 ants	 had
invaded	 his	 food.	 He	 immediately	 felt	 guilty	 about	 his	 outburst	 towards	 his
beloved	Krishna.	The	Lord	had	known	that	the	hunger	of	these	little	creatures	was
greater	than	his	own.	For	Him,	the	ant	and	Jara	were	equal.	How	arrogant	of	Jara
to	think	Krishna	had	been	cruel	to	him.	It	was	just	his	leela,	and	He	was	merely
showing	 the	 beggar	 that	 he	 was	 getting	 greedy	 and	 not	 caring	 about	 his	 fellow
creatures.	 Had	 he	 not	 dined	 the	 previous	 day?	 How	 much	 harder	 must	 it	 be	 for
these	tiny,	helpless	creatures	in	the	rain,	thought	Jara.	Joyfully,	he	watched	the	ants
carry	away	his	food.
***

Inside	 the	 palace,	 Dhaumya	 and	 the	 five	 Pandava	 brothers	 huddled	 together	 to
decide	on	the	future.	Drona’s	household	was	in	turmoil.
Aswathama	had	walked	out	of	his	home	to	meet	Suyodhana	after	another	argument
with	his	father.	Jayadratha,	Karna,	and	 Sushasana,	 sat	 celebrating	 the	 great	 day.
Suyodhana	kept	an	eye	on	the	King	of	Sindh.	He	had	noticed	that	the	King	seemed
to	have	a	soft	corner	for	his	sister	Sushala,	and	his	brotherly	instincts	were	on	the
alert.	 In	 another	 room,	 Shakuni	 lay	 wide	 awake,	 his	 mind	 working	 out	 various
schemes	to	carry	forward	his	mission.
Before	 leaving	 after	 the	 long	 day,	 Vidhura	 gently	 asked	 Bhishma	 about	 handing
over	 the	 fugitive	 to	 the	 Southern	 Confederate.	 Bhishma	 stared	 at	 his	 Prime
Minister	and	then	shook	his	head	saying	it	was	no	longer	possible.	When	Vidhura
expressed	 fears	 about	 a	 war	 with	 the	 powerful	 Confederate,	 Bhishma	 answered
cryptically	 that	 some	 wars	 were	 worth	 fighting.	 Walking	 back	 to	 his	 chamber
alone,	 Vidhura	 smiled	 to	 himself	 at	 the	 remark.	 Such	 moments	 made	 working
under	the	Grand	Regent	a	delight.
***

In	the	forest,	Ekalavya	fought	pain	and	fear	to	practice	archery…
In	their	hut,	the	aged	charioteer	consoled	his	distraught	wife,	murmuring	that	her
son	 would	 surely	 come	 to	 see	 her	 the	 next	 day,	 but	 secretly	 doubting	 his	 own

words…
In	a	chariot	speeding	towards	Dwaraka,	a	thoughtful	Prince	held	the	reins	while	a
Princess	remembered	Arjuna’s	dejected	face.	They	travelled	on	in	silence…
In	the	streets	of	Hastinapura,	a	hungry	Jara	and	his	blind	dog	walked	along	slowly.
As	his	haunting	song	about	a	compassionate	Krishna,	who	watched	over	not	only
his	devotees	but	the	tiniest	of	God’s	creations,	floated	over	its	dwellings,	big	and
small,	 the	 greatest	 city	 of	 India	 slowly	 slipped	 into	 sleep.	 Night	 had	 fallen	 on
another	day	in	the	long	history	of	an	ancient	nation.

19	REVENGE	OF	A	BRAHMIN
DHRITARASHTRA	 ANXIOUSLY	 WAITED	 FOR	 HIS	 SON	 to	appear.	He	was	puzzled	by	his

wife’s	silence.	“Gandhari,	I	hear	the	Suta	boy	is	a	better	archer	than	Arjuna.	What
was	his	name?	It	was	a	great	thing	our	son	did.	It	took	courage.	Suyodhana	 need
never	again	fear	Arjuna	with	this	newcomer	and	Aswathama	to	support	him.	But
why	is	he	late?	Gandhari,	why	are	you	so	silent?	Are	you	not	proud	of	your	son?
How	many	of	us	could	have	done	what	he	did	today?”
“They	have	come,”	Gandhari	answered	softly,	adjusting	the	King’s	headgear	and
ornaments	with	practiced	fingers	before	sitting	down	beside	him.
“Your	Highness,	see	who	has	come	to	see	you,”	said	a	familiar	voice.
“Ah,	 Shakuni!	 Welcome.	 Where	 are	 the	 boys?”	 Dhritarashtra	 turned	 his	 head
towards	the	sound.
“Why	 do	 you	 look	 so	 serious,	 sister?”	 Shakuni	 asked	 with	 a	 crooked	 smile,
walking	towards	Gandhari.
“What	is	it	you	want	here,	Shakuni?”
“Gandhari,	why	are	you	always	so	harsh	to	your	brother?	Let	him	celebrate	this
day	with	us.	But	where	are	the	new	archer	and	Suyodhana?”
“I	 am	 here,	 father,”	 Suyodhana	 replied,	 walking	 into	 the	 room	 through	 the
curtained	archway	with	Karna	and	Aswathama.
“Aha,	there	you	 are.	The	man	 of	the	moment.”	The	King	stood	up	and	embraced
his	son.	“Where	is	your	friend?”	Dhritarashtra	reached	out.
Karna	moved	forward	and	touched	the	King’s	feet.	The	King	ran	his	hands	down
Karna’s	muscled	arms	and	smiled.	“You	have	the	long	limbs	of	a	great	archer.”
“The	 best	 in	 the	 country,	 perhaps	 in	 the	 world,	 Your	 Highness,”	 Shakuni

intervened.	“Arjuna	notwithstanding.”
“Suyodhana,	 you	 almost	 finished	 Bhima,	 I	 hear,”	 Dhritarashtra	 chuckled.	 “Well
son,	you	are	now	a	warrior	and	have	the	support	of	those	who	will	not	desert	you
in	battle.	All	your	boyhood	you	have	feared	your	gifted	cousins,	but	you	need	do
so	no	longer.”	Dhritarashtra	ignored	his	wife’s	restraining	hand.	“Gandhari,	I	wish
to	 see	 my	 son	 succeed	 me.	 I	 do	 not	 want	 a	 bastard	 to	 sit	 on	 the	 throne	 of
Hastinapura.	Is	that	so	wrong?”
“Yudhishtra	 is	 the	 son	 of	 Yama,	 the	 God	 of	 Death,”	 Shakuni	 said,	 watching
Dhritarashtra’s	face	turn	red	with	anger.
Dhritarashtra	tapped	the	floor	angrily	with	his	stick.	“No!	He	is	the	son	of	some
unknown	Brahmin.	Gandhari,	do	not	interfere.	I	am	the	King	and	have	the	right	to
decide	 who	 will	 follow	 me.	 I	 have	 suffered	 enough.	 Is	 it	 my	 fault	 I	 was	 born
blind?	 Was	 there	 any	 warrior	 who	 could	 defeat	 me	 with	 a	 mace,	 blind	 or
otherwise,	when	I	was	young?	I	have	a	gift	for	you,	Suyodhana.	Gandhari,	ring	the
bell.”
As	the	three	young	men	and	Shakuni	watched,	four	guards	staggered	in	with	a	fulllength	iron	statue	of	a	warrior,	mace	lifted	over	his	head	in	combat	position.
“It	looks	like	someone	we	all	know!”	Shakuni	exclaimed,	admiring	the	wonderful
workmanship	despite	himself.
“It	is	for	you,	Suyodhana.	Take	it	and	practise	on	it,”	the	King	said.
“Yes,	nephew,	practice	breaking	Bhima’s	head.	Soon	the	time	will	come	to	do	it
on	the	real	one,”	said	Shakuni.
Gandhari	stood	up,	her	hand	shaking.	“Shakuni,	please	leave	us.	How	often	I	have
told	you….	Go	to	Gandhara	and	administer	your	lands.	I	do	not	want	you	here.”
“I	will	talk	to	the	Grand	Regent.	If	he	permits…”
“Shakuni,	please	leave	us	now,”	commanded	Gandhari.	“I	wish	to	speak	with	my
son.”
Karna	and	Aswathama	followed	Shakuni	out,	thankful	to	escape	the	embarrassing

scene.
When	they	had	left,	Gandhari	pulled	her	son	to	one	side	and	felt	his	face	with	her
fingers.	How	she	wished	she	could	see	his	face.	How	tall	he	had	grown.	He	was	a
man	now,	no	longer	the	little	boy	who	hid	under	his	father’s	bed.	“Why	did	you	do
it,	my	son?”	she	asked	gravely.	“Why	did	you	make	a	Suta	a	King,	and	risk	losing
the	support	of	the	nobles?	You	have	made	powerful	enemies	today.	They	will	try
everything	 to	 stop	 you	 from	 inheriting	 your	 father’s	 throne.	 Why	 did	 you	 do	 it,
Suyodhana?”	Gandhari	waited	for	her	son	to	speak,	fearing	his	answer.
“Mother,	I	did	it	because	it	was	the	right	thing	to	do.”
Gandhari	 turned	 away,	 lest	 he	 see	 the	 dampness	 spreading	 over	 her	 blindfold.
Thankfully,	 a	 guard	 came	 to	 say	 Guru	 Drona	 wished	 to	 see	 the	 Prince	 in	 his
chambers.	She	heard	him	bid	farewell	to	his	father,	and	nodded	her	head	without
facing	him	when	he	took	his	leave	of	her.	She	stood	still	by	the	window	until	the
sound	of	his	footsteps	faded	away.	She	was	proud	to	have	borne	such	a	noble	son,
but	the	mother	in	her	was	afraid.	She	knew	that	doing	the	right	thing	never	went
unpunished.
***

When	Suyodhana	entered	the	Guru’s	chamber,	the	Pandava	brothers	were	already
there.	Their	conversation	stopped	abruptly	when	they	saw	him.	Suyodhana	greeted
Drona	and	his	cousins,	and	stood	waiting	for	the	Guru	to	speak.
Avoiding	 Suyodhana’s	 eyes,	 Drona	 said,	 “Prince,	 it	 is	 time	 to	 pay	 your
gurudakshina.	By	now,	you	know	that	I	care	neither	for	money	nor	for	land.	I	am	a
Brahmin	and	such	material	things	do	not	affect	me	in	the	least.	But	years	ago,	I	had
a	close	friend.	We	were	both	disciples	of	Parashurama.	He	was	a	rich	Prince	and
I	a	poor	Brahmin.	When	we	finished	our	studies	and	parted,	he	promised	to	help
me	in	the	future	if	I	ever	needed	it.
“For	years,	despite	winning	the	coveted	Dharmaveera	title,	I	was	unable	to	find	a
job	 suited	 to	 my	 talents.	 Poverty	 and	 hunger	 became	 my	 constant	 companions.
When	some	boys	in	the	neighbourhood	forced	my	son	Aswathama	to	drink	batter,
calling	it	milk,	I	decided	it	was	time	to	go	and	meet	my	friend.	He	had	become	a
King	 by	 then.	 I	 went	 to	 him	 with	 a	 begging	 bowl.	 He	 made	 me	 wait	 for	 two

anxious	weeks	before	granting	me	an	audience.	Instead	of	helping,	he	insulted	me.
I	will	never	forget	the	laughter	of	the	Panchala	courtiers	when	their	King	mocked
my	 helplessness.	 Busy	 with	 the	 pleasures	 of	 his	 newly	 acquired	 kingship,	 he
treated	 me	 contemptuously.	 He	 made	 fun	 of	 my	 threadbare	 clothes	 and	 said	 that
despite	 my	 talent,	 he	 had	 always	 known	 I	 would	 never	 amount	 to	 anything.	 He
patronizingly	offered	me	the	post	of	a	junior	teacher	in	a	remote	village.	I	lost	my
cool	and	challenged	my	erstwhile	friend	to	a	duel.	But	he	said	Kings	do	not	duel
with	beggars.
“Insulted	 and	 heartbroken,	 I	 left	 Panchala	 that	 day	 but	 the	 fire	 of	 revenge	 still
burns	 in	 my	 heart.	 The	 King	 is	 none	 other	 than	 Dhrupada,	 King	 of	 Panchala.
Prince,	bring	that	rogue	to	me	and	let	me	spit	in	his	face.	As	the	Crown	Prince	of
Hastinapura,	 this	 is	 the	 least	 you	 can	 do	 for	 your	 Guru.”	 Drona	 looked	 at
Suyodhana.
Suyodhana	was	at	a	loss	for	words.	Drona	saw	his	hesitation	and	said	irritably,	“I
knew	 you	 would	 be	 reluctant.	 When	 have	 you	 ever	 respected	 your	 teachers,
elders,	or	Brahmins?	Arjuna	would	do	it	in	a	trice,	but	Yudhishtra	said	it	would
be	proper	to	ask	you	first,	as	the	country’s	Crown	Prince.”
Trying	 hard	 to	 suppress	 his	 rising	 anger,	 Suyodhana	 replied,	 “It	 is	 improper	 to
wage	 war	 against	 a	 friendly	 vassal	 state	 without	 adequate	 reason.	 Besides,	 I
cannot	 possibly	 undertake	 such	 a	 mission	 without	 the	 permission	 of	 either	 the
Grand	Regent	or	the	King.”
“Proper	reason?	Tchaw!	Insulting	a	Brahmin	is	not	proper	reason	for	you,	Prince?
You	 will	 have	 the	 King’s	 permission	 within	 the	 hour.	 Then	 you	 will	 follow	 my
orders,	as	is	your	duty	as	my	disciple.	If	you	fail,	which	I	fear	you	will,	Arjuna
will	be	sent	to	ruin	Dhrupada’s	cursed	land.	Go	and	get	ready.”
Suyodhana	 bowed	 and	 left	 the	 presence	 of	 his	 Guru.	 Walking	 towards	 his
chamber,	 he	 was	 a	 worried	 man.	 Aswathama,	 Sushasana,	 Jayadratha,	 and	 the
newly	crowned	King	of	Anga,	were	waiting	for	him.	Karna	stood	up	when	he	saw
the	Crown	Prince	and	bowed.	The	son	of	the	charioteer	still	felt	uneasy	being	in
the	company	of	these	 aristocrats	and	 his	 movements	 were	 awkward.	 He	 did	 not
know	whether	to	show	the	courtesy	due	to	Kshatriyas	and	Brahmins	by	a	Suta,	and
be	considered	stiff	and	formal	by	his	new	friends,	or	be	cool	and	unaffected,	and
risk	being	called	arrogant.

Suyodhana,	sensing	his	dilemma,	went	to	Karna	first	and	made	him	sit	down	near
him.	“We	are	all	friends	here,	Karna.	You	can	be	comfortable	with	us.	In	fact,	we
are	 honoured	 to	 have	 your	 friendship.	 Do	 not	 think	 for	 a	 moment	 that	 I	 am
bestowing	a	favour	upon	you.	I	regret	not	being	able	to	do	more	for	such	a	talented
person.”
“I	 have	 been	 telling	 him	 that	 he	 is	 the	 only	 one	 among	 us	 who	 has	 earned	 the
respect	 he	 has	 been	 given,	 whereas	 the	 rest	 of	 us	 were	 lucky	 to	 be	 born
privileged,”	said	Jayadratha,	King	of	Sindh.
“What	can	I	do	in	return	for	such	undeserved	friendship,	Your	Highness?”	Karna
said.
“Begin	 by	 calling	 me	 Suyodhana.	 Or	 if	 you	 wish,	 you	 can	 use	 my	 nickname,
Duryodhana,	as	Dhaumya	and	his	disciples	prefer,”	suggested	Suyodhana,	amidst
laughter.
“That	certainly	suits	you	better.	You	really	do	not	know	how	to	use	your	weapons
well.	Otherwise	you	would	have	used	your	mace	and	smashed	Bhima’s	thick	skull
that	day,	Duryodhana…”	Aswathama	said,	adding	more	merriment.
Suyodhana	found	his	mind	eased	of	its	tension.	“Listen!	We	have	a	problem.	The
Guru	has	asked	me	to	attack	Panchala	and	capture	Dhrupada,	as	my	gurudakshina
to	him,”	Suyodhana	informed	his	friends,	warily	eyeing	Aswathama.
The	young	Brahmin	smiled	and	said,	“I	know!	That	is	an	old	grudge	my	old	man
holds.	Every	night	he	bores	us	to	death	by	talking	about	the	insult	he	suffered	at
Panchala’s	hands.”
“But	that’s	great!	I	was	waiting	for	some	action.”	Sushasana	jumped	up	from	his
seat	enthusiastically.
“Sit	down,	you	idiot!”	Jayadratha	pushed	aside	the	younger	Kaurava.	“Suyodhana,
is	it	worthwhile	fighting	a	battle	over	a	man’s	personal	vendetta?	Besides,	I	do	not
think	the	King	will	give	permission	to	wage	war	against	a	friendly	vassal	state.”
“Exactly	my	thoughts,	Jayadratha.	Also,	I	 do	 not	 want	 to	 start	 a	 war	 without	 the
permission	of	Bhishma	or	the	King.”

An	 uneasy	 silence	 followed.	 A	 guard	 knocked	 on	 the	 door,	 entered,	 bowed,	 and
gave	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 a	 message.	 Suyodhana	 dismissed	 him	 and	 read	 the
message.	Then	he	gravely	handed	it	to	his	friends
“What	the	hell?”	Jayadratha	cried	out.	“How	did	Guru	Drona	manage	this?”
Sushasana	jumped	up,	grabbed	the	palm	leaf	from	Jayadratha’s	hands,	and	read	it
aloud.	It	was	an	official	order	from	King	Dhritarashtra	declaring	war	on	Panchala,
and	appointing	Crown	Prince	Suyodhana	Commander-	in-Chief	of	the	Hastinapura
forces,	to	lead	the	attack.
“Suyodhana,	 this	 is	 outrageous.	 How	 can	 the	 King	 order	 an	 attack	 on	 a	 vassal
kingdom	 without	 any	 provocation?	 I	 too,	 am	 a	 vassal	 King.	 How	 can	 I	 sleep
peacefully	without	worrying	about	Hastinapura’s	armies	running	amok	in	Sindh,	if
this	is	how	Hastinapura	treats	its	vassals?”	Jayadratha	grabbed	the	palm	leaf	from
Sushasana’s	hand,	read	it	again	and	threw	it	down	in	anger.
Everyone	 looked	 at	 Aswathama,	 carefully	 measuring	 his	 reaction.	 “Hey,	 do	 not
look	at	me.	I	am	not	answerable	for	my	father’s	deeds	or	misdeeds.	I	suggest	we
go	 to	 Kampilya,	 capital	 of	 Panchala,	 and	 sort	 things	 out.	 If	 Suyodhana	 does	 not
take	 up	 the	 assignment,	 Yudhishtra	 will,	 and	 that	 will	 be	 a	 disaster.	 Let	 us	 see
whether	Dhrupada	is	ready	to	compromise	to	satisfy	my	father’s	ego.”
“What	he	says	makes	sense,”	Karna	said,	watching	Suyodhana’s	face.
A	 deep	 silence	 ensued.	 Suyodhana	 began	 pacing	 the	 room,	 his	 hands	 clasped
behind	his	back,	his	head	bent.	His	friends	waited	anxiously.
“We	do	not	have	a	choice.	The	King	has	ordered	it.”	Suyodhana	said.
Jayadratha	went	out,	slamming	the	door	shut	with	a	bang.
***

By	 the	 evening,	 two	 divisions	 of	 Hastinapura	 cavalry	 and	 three	 divisions	 of
infantry	 started	 towards	 Kampilya,	 the	 Panchala	 capital;	 with	 Suyodhana,
Sushasana,	Karna,	and	Aswathama	in	the	lead.	Jayadratha	refused	to	participate	in
the	attack	and	remained	in	Hastinapura.	He	had	another	reason	as	well.	Suyodhana
was	aware	of	 it.	He	thought	Jayadratha	was	an	honourable	man	and	if	his	sister

Sushala	found	the	King	of	Sindh	attractive,	Suyodhana	was	not	 averse	 to	sealing
the	relationship	through	marriage.
The	armies	of	Hastinapura	reached	Panchala	the	next	afternoon.	Breaking	through
the	feeble	defences	at	the	border,	they	laid	siege	to	the	capital.	What	remained	of
the	Panchala	army	withdrew	into	the	city	fortress	to	brace	for	an	attack.	However,
surprising	the	Commanders,	Suyodhana	sent	a	polite	request	for	an	audience	with
the	 King.	 It	 took	 a	 whole	 night	 of	 heated	 debate	 amongst	 the	 Panchala	 nobles	 to
decide	whether	to	trust	the	Crown	Prince	or	not.	They	suspected	treachery	in	such
an	unusual	offer	from	an	invading	army.	Finally,	the	eunuch	Shikandi,	the	King’s
adopted	child,	volunteered	to	receive	the	invaders.
Suyodhana	entered	the	palace	unarmed,	along	with	Karna	and	Aswathama.	He	had
instructed	Sushasana	to	attack	and	take	the	fort	in	case	he	did	not	hear	from	them
in	a	couple	of	hours.	At	the	entrance,	a	giant	of	a	man	waited	to	receive	them.	As
they	neared,	Aswathama’s	eyes	grew	round	in	surprise.	Was	it	a	man	or	a	woman?
He	nudged	Karna,	who	whispered	the	person	was	a	eunuch.	Suyodhana	turned	and
gestured	for	silence.	Shikandi	bowed	to	Suyodhana	and	they	entered	a	luxuriously
furnished	 hall.	 The	 entire	 Panchala	 sabha	 rose	 to	 receive	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 of
Hastinapura.	The	King	looked	rather	agitated.	A	handsome	young	man	stood	close
to	 him	 and	 kept	 whispering	 into	 his	 ear.	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 friends	 stood	 in	 the
middle	of	the	sabha.
The	 King	 rose	 from	 his	 throne.	 “We	 are	 at	 your	 service,	 Prince	 Suyodhana.	 We
would	have	come	to	Hastinapura	had	you	ordered	us	to	do	so.	We	are	your	vassals
and	 friends.	 That	 should	 mean	 something,	 even	 to	 powerful	 kingdoms	 like
Hastinapura.	 You	 give	 us	 protection	 from	 our	 enemies	 and	 that	 is	 why	 we	 pay
homage.	But,	if	you	become	our	enemy,	who	will	save	us	smaller	kingdoms?	Does
the	Grand	Regent	know	about	this	or	is	it	your	own	adventure?”	The	young	man
beside	 the	 throne	 put	 out	 a	 restraining	 hand	 to	 prevent	 the	 King	 from	 saying
something	undiplomatic	and	making	the	situation	worse.
“Sir,	we	come	not	as	invaders	but	friends,”	replied	Suyodhana.	”We	have	come	at
the	behest	of	one	of	your	old	friends.	Guru	Drona	is	still	angered	at	the	way	you
received	him	long	ago.”
“Ah	 Drona!”	 King	 Dhrupada	 exclaimed.	 “I	 have	 long	 regretted	 behaving	 like	 a
boor	 that	 day	 and	 have	 repented	 it	 every	 day,	 every	 moment.	 I	 was	 young	 and

drunk	 with	 power,	 wine	 and	 women.	 His	 poverty	 looked	 so	 ridiculous	 to	 me.
Drona	 is	 a	 man	 of	 great	 talents	 but	 he	 was	 wallowing	 in	 self-pity	 and	 misery
instead	of	living	life	fruitfully.	I	laughed	at	him,	his	poverty,	and	his	situation.	I	felt
so	superior	that	day.	Later,	when	I	returned	to	my	senses,	it	was	too	late.	My	old
friend	had	gone.	I	tried	to	make	amends,	but	he	would	not	relent.	Now	he	has	sent
his	disciple	to	ransack	my	country.”
“Sir,	we	too,	wish	to	 avoid	 unnecessary	 bloodshed.	 This	 is	 a	 misunderstanding
between	old	friends.	This	young	man	here	is	Drona’s	son	and…”
Before	Suyodhana	could	finish,	King	Dhrupada	 rushed	 towards	 Aswathama	 and
embraced	 him.	 “Ah,	 you	 look	 exactly	 like	 your	 father	 when	 he	 was	 your	 age.	 I
wonder	why	I	did	not	see	it	when	I	first	set	eyes	on	you.	Your	name?”
“Aswathama,	Your	Highness.	And	this	is	Karna,	King	of	Anga.”
“I	 am	 honoured	 indeed	 by	 your	 presence,	 Sir,”	 Dhrupada	 folded	 his	 hands	 in	 a
namaste	to	Karna.
Suyodhana	 was	 pleased	 by	 the	 King’s	 welcome	 to	 his	 friend.	 He	 had	 feared
Dhrupada	 would	 not	 treat	 Karna	 courteously	 because	 of	 his	 caste,	 but	 the	 King
showed	 no	 such	 signs.	 He	 introduced	 them	 to	 Shikandi,	 the	 eunuch,	 whom
Dhrupada	 had	 adopted	 long	 ago;	 and	 the	 young	 man	 standing	 near	 him	 –
Dhristadyumna,	Crown	Prince	of	Panchala.
When	 the	 initial	 ice	 had	 been	 broken,	 Suyodhana	 gently	 broached	 the	 terms	 of
Panchala’s	 surrender,	 without	 actually	 using	 the	 word.	 Dhrupada	 agreed	 to	 bear
the	entire	cost	of	Suyodhana’s	expedition,	give	two	bullock-carts	of	gold,	precious
stones	and	expensive	clothes,	fifty	horses,	and	one	hundred	cows,	as	gifts	for	the
Guru.	Dhrupada	appreciated	Suyodhana’s	terming	the	spoils	as	the	King’s	gifts	to
his	 old	 friend.	 It	 enabled	 him	 to	 save	 face.	 Dhrupada	 also	 promised	 to	 go	 to
Hastinapura	 and	 apologize	 to	 the	 Guru	 soon.	 He	 insisted	 his	 guests	 stay	 another
day.	The	occasion	was	a	special	one	for	Panchala	as	the	Princess	Draupadi	was
turning	eighteen.	They	had	all	heard	of	her	famed	beauty	and	the	young	men	were
more	than	willing	to	accept	the	King’s	invitation	to	attend	his	daughter’s	comingof-age	 celebration.	 Suyodhana	 was	 proud	 of	 the	 way	 he	 had	 handled	 a	 tricky
situation	and	was	sure	the	Grand	Regent	would	appreciate	it.

That	night,	the	palace	glowed	with	a	golden	hue	from	thousands	of	oil	lamps.	The
young	 men	 revelled	 in	 the	 festivities.	 Folk	 musicians	 filled	 the	 air	 with	 soulful
renderings	 of	 old	 love	 songs,	 as	 Suyodhana	 and	 Sushasana	 danced	 to	 the	 wild
rhythms	of	the	drummers,	much	to	everyone’s	 amusement.	 They	 even	 dragged	 in
the	shy	Karna.	Soon	Aswathama	and	the	Panchala	Prince,	Dhristadyumna,	joined
in	 as	 well.	 While	 the	 young	 men	 danced,	 Dhristadyumna	 observed	 that	 Karna’s
movements	suddenly	became	awkward.	He	followed	the	King	of	Anga’s	gaze	and
smiled.	He	understood	why	his	new	friend	had	suddenly	become	clumsy-footed.	A
little	way	away,	sat	his	beautiful	sister	Draupadi,	dazzling	in	a	beautiful	costume
and	sparkling	jewels.	She	looked	celestial.	Her	luminous	black	eyes	roved	over
Karna’s	chiselled	body.	Aswathama	too,	observed	the	sudden	change	in	Karna	and
let	out	a	gurgle	of	amusement.	Sushasana	picked	up	the	cue	and	began	exaggerated
gestures	to	the	love	songs	the	folk	artistes	were	singing.	Suyodhana	grinned	at	his
friend.
Dhristadyumna	ran	over	to	his	sister	and	dragged	her	towards	the	group.	“This	is
Karna,	King	of	Anga,”	he	said,	introducing	him	first.	He	then	named	the	others.
Draupadi	 bowed	 formally	 to	 Karna	 and	 joined	 her	 hands	 in	 a	 namaste.	 Karna
looked	at	her	lovely	face,	dark	smooth	skin,	perfectly	shaped	red	lips,	and	pearly
white	teeth,	and	let	out	a	shaky	breath.	He	had	not	expected	to	see	her	from	such	a
close	 distance	 and	 stood	 awkwardly,	 not	 knowing	 what	 to	 say,	 his	 heart	 beating
faster	than	the	roll	of	the	country	drums	around	them.	She	stared	at	his	face	and	he
felt	his	skin	burning	wherever	her	eyes	touched	him.	The	trace	of	a	smile	lit	her
face,	making	it	look	even	more	angelic.	Karna	found	it	impossible	to	drag	his	eyes
away.	He	kept	gazing	at	her,	not	knowing	what	to	do;	not	caring	for	the	comments
of	his	grinning	friends.	When	the	silence	between	them	grew	awkward,	she	bowed
once	more	and	returned	to	her	seat.	Aswathama	pulled	Karna	back	to	their	wild
dancing.	He	tried	to	regain	the	joy	of	a	few	minutes	before,	but	he	could	feel	her
eyes	on	him	and	his	legs	felt	wooden.
“Soon	there	will	be	a	swayamvara,”	 Dhristadyumna	 said	 quietly	 in	 Karna’s	 ear
after	 the	 party	 had	 grown	 old	 and	 the	 beautiful	 night	 had	 begun	 greying.	 “I	 will
ensure	you	get	an	invitation,	Karna.	Come	again	and	win	my	sister’s	hand	like	a
true	warrior.”
“Not	while	I	am	here	to	compete	against	him,”	Aswathama	butted	in.

Sushasana	 smacked	 the	 Brahmin	 on	 the	 head	 saying,	 “Fool!	 You	 wish	 to	 fight
Karna?	Are	you	sane?”
***

When	they	left	Kampilya	the	next	day,	they	were	happy	beyond	words.	Aswathama
and	Sushasana	sang	the	rowdy	songs	they	had	learnt	the	night	before,	and	Karna
was	 lost	 in	 his	 own	 world	 where	 everything	 looked	 lovely	 and	 had	 her	 name
written	 over	 it.	 When	 they	 passed	 a	 derelict	 village	 on	 the	 way,	 Karna	 insisted
they	 stop.	 The	 lack	 of	 drinking	 water	 and	 the	 condition	 of	 its	 inhabitants	 was
impossible	to	witness	and	then	walk	away	from.	Suyodhana	ordered	his	soldiers
to	dig	a	well.	It	delayed	them	by	another	four	days,	but	the	happiness	this	act	gave
them	 and	 the	 villagers,	 was	 worth	 the	 delay.	 Aswathama	 mockingly	 wrote
‘Draupadi’s	Well’	on	it	when	the	masons	had	completed	the	wall.	Karna	knew	it
was	useless	to	chide	his	happy-go-lucky	Brahmin	friend.	He	had	no	choice	but	to
join	 in	 the	 laughter.	 Seeing	 Karna’s	 happiness,	 Suyodhana	 was	 reminded	 of	 his
own	love.	He	yearned	for	Subhadra’s	touch.	The	thought	of	her	smile	was	like	a
soothing	caress	on	his	tired	body	and	kept	him	going	until	he	entered	the	gates	of
Hastinapura.
People	 thronged	 both	 sides	 of	 the	 road	 to	 hail	 the	 victorious	 Prince.	 The
procession	 entered	 the	 palace	 gates	 to	 cheering	 and	 applause.	 At	 the	 top	 of	 the
flight	 of	 steps	 leading	 to	 the	 palace,	 Drona	 stood	 with	 his	 hands	 on	 his	 hips.
Beside	him	stood	the	Pandavas,	and	a	group	of	Brahmins,	with	Dhaumya	at	their
head.
The	Crown	Prince	went	to	Drona,	bowed	to	his	Guru,	and	said,	“Sir,	Panchala	has
been	vanquished	as	per	your	wishes.	The	train	with	gifts	is	here,	as	you	can	see.
Dhrupada	repents	the	wrongs	he	has	done	you	and...”
“Where	is	Dhrupada?”	Drona	asked	frostily.
“Sir,	 he	 surrendered	 and	 sent	 these	 gifts	 for	 you.	 He	 will	 come	 to	 seek	 your
pardon	in	person.”
“Enough,	 Duryodhana!	 Gifts!	 Pshaw!	 Who	 needs	 his	 gifts?	 What	 are	 gifts	 to	 a
Brahmin?	I	told	you	I	do	not	care	for	material	things.	He	insulted	me	and	I	wanted
you	to	capture	and	bring	him	here,	tied	in	chains,	and	throw	him	at	my	feet.	Fool!

You	have	sold	the	honour	of	your	Guru	for	a	few	gold	coins.	Perhaps	the	Panchala
army	even	defeated	you	and	you	looted	some	villages	on	the	way	back	to	present
me	with	these	‘gifts’.	Your	delay	would	thus	be	explained.”
Trembling	 with	 rage,	 Drona	 rushed	 to	 the	 carts	 containing	 the	 gifts	 and	 kicked
over	a	few	pots.	Coins	rolled	over	the	ground.	He	turned	back	to	Suyodhana,	still
angry	 at	 what	 he	 considered	 the	 Prince’s	 betrayal.	 “Since	 you	 insisted	 on	 taking
this	Suta	and	my	foolish	son	with	you,	what	else	did	you	expect?	Do	any	of	you
know	 how	 to	 even	 hold	 a	 weapon	 properly,	 let	 alone	 fight	 with	 it?	 You	 have
insulted	 me.	 I	 will	 show	 you	 how	 warriors	 who	 follow	 the	 path	 of	 dharma
behave,	how	disciples	who	respect	their	teacher,	act.	Arjuna!”	Drona	called.	The
Pandava	 Prince	 came	 forward	 and	 bowed.	 “Show	 this	 coward	 how	 to	 follow
simple	instructions.	Bring	me	my	foe.	Make	him	crawl	before	me	like	a	worm.”
“Your	wish	is	my	command,	Guru.”	Arjuna	bowed	again	and	blew	his	conch.
Before	 Suyodhana	 could	 react,	 hundreds	 of	 equestrian	 guards	 galloped	 towards
them	and	took	up	combat	positions.	The	five	Pandavas	ran,	as	if	on	cue,	towards
the	cavalry	and	mounted	quickly.	They	thundered	past	the	shocked	Suyodhana	and
his	friends.	More	cavalry	joined	them	and	the	hundreds	turned	into	thousands	as
the	 imperial	 army	 of	 Hastinapura	 rushed	 towards	 unsuspecting	 Panchala,	 with
Arjuna	in	the	lead.
On	 either	 side	 of	 the	 road,	 the	 people	 who	 had	 begun	 dispersing	 after	 having
cheered	Suyodhana’s	return,	regrouped	and	began	cheering	Arjuna.	Dhaumya	had
been	 fanning	 the	 flame	 of	 patriotism	 to	 new	 heights	 and	 everyone	 was	 excited
about	 the	 way	 their	 country	 was	 dealing	 with	 a	 vassal	 kingdom.	 Within	 hours,
Dhaumya	 had	 successfully	 spread	 rumours	 that	 the	 Panchala	 army	 had	 defeated
Suyodhana	 and	 that	 Arjuna	 was	 now	 leading	 a	 new	 army	 to	 teach	 the	 proud
Panchalas	a	lesson.
Arjuna’s	 army	 descended	 on	 a	 sleeping	 Kampilya.	 Before	 the	 unsuspecting
Panchalas	understood	what	was	happening,	Arjuna	had	smashed	the	city	defences,
set	the	city	on	fire,	and	breached	the	palace	fortress.	Bhima	stayed	back	in	the	city
to	supervise	the	looting	and	arson.	The	battle	was	soon	over.	Arjuna	entered	the
King’s	 chamber,	 woke	 the	 sleeping	 Dhrupada,	 and	 arrested	 him.	 Yudhishtra
captured	Dhristadyumna	and	the	eunuch	Shikandi.	By	noon	the	imperial	army	had
begun	marching	back	with	King	Dhrupada	chained	in	a	cart	for	all	to	see.	His	son

Dhristadyumna	 and	 Shikandi,	 were	 also	 tied	 in	 similar	 fashion.	 The	 victorious
procession	rushed	towards	Hastinapura.	Behind	them,	Kampilya	lay	in	ruins,	the
shops	and	temples	smouldering.	Severed	limbs	and	lifeless	bodies	lay	scattered	in
the	streets.	The	signs	of	invasion	and	defeat	were	written	all	over	the	unfortunate
land.
By	 evening,	 Arjuna’s	 victorious	 army	 entered	 Hastinapura	 and	 the	 people
thronged	the	Royal	highway	to	see	the	captured	Panchala	King	and	heap	abuse	on
him.	They	hailed	Arjuna	and	his	brave	brothers,	who	had	accomplished	what	the
Crown	Prince	had	 failed	 to	 do.	 The	 greatest	 archer	 in	 the	 world	 had	 saved	 the
honour	 of	 the	 kingdom	 and	 was	 dragging	 their	 enemy	 through	 the	 streets.	 The
citizens	felt	proud.	Some	expressed	it	by	rushing	to	the	captured	foes	and	spitting
in	 their	 faces,	 others	 by	 flinging	 abuse.	 A	 few	 bold	 ones	 managed	 to	 punch	 the
captives.	The	procession	swelled	with	dancing	young	men,	drummers,	and	a	group
of	 Brahmins	 hailing	 the	 victory	 of	 dharma	 and	 shouting	 slogans	 in	 favour	 of
Arjuna	and	Yudhishtra.
Drona	 stood	 on	 the	 veranda	 near	 the	 main	 entrance	 of	 the	 palace.	 On	 the	 grand
steps	leading	to	the	lawn	and	garden,	stood	more	Brahmins,	holding	flowers	and
scented	water.	As	Arjuna	and	his	brothers	dismounted	and	walked	towards	their
Guru,	they	chanted	holy	mantras	and	showered	them	with	petals.	Yudhishtra	fell	at
Guru	Drona’s	feet,	and	then	at	Dhaumya’s.
Choked	 with	 emotion,	 Drona	 was	 unable	 to	 utter	 a	 single	 word.	 He	 hugged
Arjuna.	“My	beloved	disciple,	what	more	can	a	Guru	ask?”	he	kept	repeating,	as
his	tears	of	joy	wet	Arjuna’s	broad	shoulders.
Dhaumya	 raised	 his	 hands	 and	 the	 drumming	 stopped.	 The	 Brahmins	 gulped	 on
their	unfinished	mantras.	“This	is	a	proud	moment	in	the	history	of	Hastinapura.
Today,	our	boys	have	proved	to	the	world	that	our	kingdom	will	not	tolerate	any
insult	 to	 Brahmins.	 Prince	 Yudhishtra	 here	 has	 taken	 his	 first	 step	 towards
upholding	our	eternal	dharma.	He	is	not	a	mere	Prince;	he	is	the	embodiment	of
dharma.	 From	 today,	 let	 him	 be	 known	 as	 Dharmaputra	 Yudhishtra,	 Son	 of
Dharma.”
Dhaumya	 raised	 his	 hands	 and	 the	 holy	 mantras	 resumed	 as	 the	 eldest	 Pandava
bowed	his	head	in	humility.	The	crowd	gave	a	huge	cheer	and	someone	cried	out:
Jaya	 Jaya	 Dharmaputra	 Yudhishtra.	 The	 words	 echoed	 from	 thousands	 of

throats.	 The	 drums	 began	 beating	 again.	 Dowager	 Kunti	 came	 running	 from	 her
chamber	and	edged	her	way	towards	her	sons.	She	turned	to	wave	to	the	crowd,
who	roared	back.
“Where	is	that	evil	man	who	dared	insult	our	Guru?”	asked	Dhaumya.
Arjuna	 and	 Bhima	 rushed	 to	 the	 cart	 where	 the	 bound	 Dhrupada	 sat.	 Bhima
grabbed	the	defeated	King	of	Panchala	by	the	throat,	and	with	Arjuna	leading	the
way,	 he	 pulled	 and	 shoved	 him	 towards	 Drona.	 Nakula	 and	 Sahadeva	 dragged
Dhristadyumna	and	Shikandi	in	similar	fashion.	The	Priests	spat	on	the	captives	as
they	 passed	 them	 on	 the	 steps.	 Bhima	 threw	 the	 Panchala	 King	 at	 Guru	 Drona’s
feet.
The	Guru	laughed	loudly,	slapping	his	thigh.	As	his	old	classmate	and	friend	fell
on	his	face,	the	Guru	kicked	him.	The	crowd	cheered.	“Ha	ha…	 now	who	is	at
whose	 feet,	 you	 arrogant	 Kshatriya?	 Who	 is	 the	 supplicant	 and	 who	 the
benefactor?	You	rogue…	remember	the	day	I	came	to	you	for	help	and	how	you
treated	me?	This	kick	is	for	your	arrogance	and	this	one	is	for	your	pride…”
Suyodhana	 and	 his	 friends	 finally	 broke	 through	 the	 ranks	 of	 the	 Priests	 and
reached	 the	 Guru	 just	 as	 the	 horns	 sounded	 in	 the	 familiar	 blast	 announcing	 the
arrival	of	the	Grand	Regent.	The	chariot	carrying	Bhishma	and	the	Prime	Minister
entered	the	palace	gates	and	the	crowd	grew	silent.	People	moved	to	make	way
and	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 ascended	 the	 steps	 quickly.	 He	 stopped	 near	 the	 Panchala
King,	coiled	into	a	foetal	position	to	protect	himself	from	Drona’s	vicious	kicks.
Drona	paled	when	he	saw	Bhishma’s	rigid	face	and	burning	eyes.
The	Grand	Regent	lifted	the	fallen	man	and	was	shocked	to	see	it	was	Dhrupada,
one	of	their	prominent	vassal	Kings.	“Can	anyone	explain	what	is	going	on	here?”
Bhishma	asked,	his	voice	cold	with	contempt.	Everyone	trembled	in	fear.	No	one
wished	to	face	the	Grand	Regent	when	he	was	angry.
Dhaumya	knew	the	responsibility	for	an	explanation	had	fallen	onto	his	shoulders
since	 Drona	 showed	 no	 inclination	 to	 speak.	 He	 moved	 forward.	 “Your
Excellency,	this	man	insulted	a	Brahmin,	and	we	are	meting	out	just	punishment.”
“Insulted	a	Brahmin?	Do	you	know	who	this	man	is?	He	is	the	King	of	Panchala,
and	 you	 are	 treating	 him	 like	 a	 criminal.	 Who	 did	 he	 insult	 and	 when?”	 No	 one

dared	 answer.	 Bhishma	 drew	 his	 sword	 and	 cut	 the	 ropes	 binding	 the	 King.	 He
ordered	the	eunuch	and	the	Prince	of	Panchala	be	freed	as	well.	Then	he	turned	to
Dhaumya.	“Tell	me	who	insulted	whom?	When	and	how?”
“Sir,	he	insulted	our	Raja	Guru	Drona.”
“When?”
Dhaumya	 looked	 at	 Drona,	 who	 finally	 came	 forward.	 “Your	 Excellency,	 he
insulted	me	seventeen	years	ago,	when	I	went	to	beg	for	his	aid.”
“What!	Guru,	is	this	is	a	joke?	He	insulted	you	seventeen	years	ago	and	now	you
capture	him	using	the	Hastinapura	army	and	destroy	our	relationship	with	a	vassal
state?	 Who	 ordered	 the	 attack	 on	 a	 friendly	 State	 without	 my	 permission?	 You
have	many	questions	to	answer,	Drona.”
Dhrupada	 laughed	 loudly	 at	 hearing	 this,	 which	 further	 provoked	 the	 Brahmins.
“Adharma!	Adharma!	 Does	 the	 pride	 of	 a	 Brahmin	 have	 no	 value	 in	 this	 land?
Shame	 on	 Hastinapura,”	 they	 chorused,	 gaining	 courage	 in	 the	 anonymity	 of	 the
crowd.
Bhishma	 ignored	 them	 and	 moved	 menacingly	 close	 to	 Drona.	 The	 Guru
unsheathed	his	sword,	ready	to	take	on	the	Grand	Regent	and	become	a	martyr	to
dharma.
Kunti	 ran	 between	 the	 two	 men.	 “Pitamaha,	 why	 are	 you	 ruining	 my	 sons’
reputation	 like	 this?	 Is	 it	 because	 they	 have	 done	 what	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 could
not?”
There	 were	 many	 retorts	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 could	 have	 made	 but	 he	 was	 a
gentleman.	Kunti	was	aware	he	would	never	address	a	woman	rudely	in	public	or
in	 private.	 Bhishma	 shook	 his	 head	 in	 despair.	 Grabbing	 the	 King	 of	 Panchala’s
hands,	 he	 said,	 “Your	 Highness,	 accept	 my	 apologies	 for	 what	 has	 transpired.	 I
have	 no	 words	 to	 express	 my	 regret	 and	 sorrow.	 Please	 accompany	 me	 to	 the
sabha.	Let	me	see	what	I	can	do	to	right	this	wrong	committed	by	Hastinapura.”
With	 a	 heavy	 heart,	 Bhishma	 walked	 to	 the	 sabha,	 followed	 by	 the	 others.	 The
showdown	 began.	 Drona	 offered	 his	 resignation.	 Bhishma	 angrily	 responded
saying	he	would	have	been	fired	anyhow.	The	entire	assembly	of	nobles	rose	in

protest,	as	an	amused	Dhrupada	and	his	sons	watched	how	Government	was	run	in
Hastinapura,	the	de-facto	capital	of	India.	Prince	Suyodhana	was	summoned	and
given	a	public	tongue-lashing	by	the	Grand	Regent,	for	forgetting	his	raja	dharma
in	leading	their	forces	against	a	vassal	state	without	provocation.	When	the	Prince
tried	 to	defend	himself	saying	he	had	orders	from	King	Dhritarashtra,	the	Grand
Regent	turned	to	look	at	the	monarch	in	disbelief.	Bhishma	asked	the	Prince	where
his	 common	 sense	 had	 gone,	 reminding	 him	 that	 he	 was	 duty	 bound	 to	 disobey
orders	 if	 they	 went	 against	 what	 was	 right.	 Suyodhana	 remained	 silent.	 In	 the
depths	 of	 his	 heart,	 he	 believed	 he	 should	 have	 refused	 to	 follow	 the	 Guru’s
orders	in	the	first	instance.	He	accepted	he	had	made	an	error	of	judgement.
But	 Drona	 refused	 to	 be	 cowed.	 When	 he	 found	 he	 had	 the	 support	 of	 the
Brahmins,	 he	 remained	 defiant	 and	 stubborn,	 refusing	 to	 apologize.	 The	 most	 he
would	say	was	that	he	would	consider	Dhrupada	a	friend	again,	now	that	he	had
been	paid	back	in	his	own	coin.	The	incident	was	best	forgotten.
Bhishma	 then	 summoned	 Prince	 Yudhishtra,	 who	 calmly	 maintained	 that	 he	 had
followed	 dharma	 and	 done	 his	 duty	 without	 worrying	 about	 the	 results.	 When
asked,	Arjuna	said	the	same	thing.	He	added,	that	as	a	disciple	of	Drona,	his	first
duty	 was	 towards	 his	 respected	 teacher	 and	 what	 was	 due	 to	 him.	 The	 nobles
received	the	statements	of	both	Pandava	Princes	with	applause.
Bhishma	looked	helplessly	at	Dhrupada.	A	mocking	smile	played	on	the	Panchala
King’s	 lips.	 Bhishma	 knew	 he	 looked	 foolish.	 He	 enquired	 about	 the	 gifts	 the
Panchala	King	had	sent	Drona,	and	ordered	them	returned	immediately.	Dhaumya
interjected	to	say	that	gifts	given	to	a	Brahmin	could	not	be	taken	back.	However,
Drona	could	distribute	them	among	the	Brahmins	present	since	he	was	an	ascetic
and	 did	 not	 care	 for	 material	 things.	 Bhishma	 exploded	 in	 rage,	 banging	 his
clenched	fist	on	the	armrest	of	his	chair.	The	situation	was	turning	ugly.
Then	 King	 Dhrupada	 stood	 up	 to	 say	 he	 would	 not	 take	 back	 anything	 he	 had
gifted.	 The	 Brahmins	 accepted	 his	 statement	 with	 loud	 cheers	 and	 praised	 the
generous	 King	 of	 Panchala.	 Dhrupada	 folded	 his	 hands	 and	 bowed	 to	 the
Brahmins	who	had	spat	on	him	just	a	short	while	ago.	They	blessed	him	with	long
life.
Bhishma	felt	sickened	by	the	farce	playing	out	before	him.	He	dismissed	the	sabha
and	walked	tiredly	back	to	his	chamber.	He	did	not	wait	to	see	Drona	approach

Dhrupada	and	hug	him.	As	Bhishma	walked	past,	Shikandi	drew	an	imaginary	line
across	his	throat	and	smirked.	Immersed	in	his	own	thoughts,	the	Grand	Regent	did
not	see	the	gesture,	but	Vidhura	saw	the	hatred	in	those	glassy	eyes	and	shuddered.
He	 placed	 himself	 protectively	 between	 the	 eunuch	 and	 the	 Grand	 Regent,	 and
breathed	 a	 sigh	 of	 relief	 when	 Bhishma	 was	 safely	 past	 Shikandi.	 The	 Grand
Regent	 was	 tired	 and	 heartsick.	 Hanging	 his	 head	 in	 defeat,	 he	 entered	 his
chambers	and	waited	for	Vidhura	to	close	the	heavy	doors.
***

In	 the	 sabha,	 the	 Panchala	 King	 accepted	 Drona’s	 invitation	 and	 everyone
proceeded	towards	the	banqueting	hall	to	eat	and	drink	in	the	name	of	friendship
rediscovered.	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 friends	 were	 standing	 near	 the	 doorway,
animatedly	discussing	the	turn	of	events,	when	someone	tapped	Aswathama	on	the
shoulder.	 The	 young	 Brahmin	 turned	 to	 see	 the	 burning	 eyes	 of	 Dhristadyumna
staring	into	his	own.	With	all	the	venom	he	could	muster,	Dhristadyumna	hissed,
“You	untrustworthy	Brahmin!	For	a	while,	I	thought	you	were	my	friend.	See	how
you	have	treated	my	father.	We	trusted	you	and	gave	you	gifts	to	avoid	a	war,	and
you	 repaid	 our	 hospitality	 by	 dragging	 us	 like	 criminals	 in	 chains	 through	 the
streets.	Mark	my	words	you	cowards,	you	and	your	great	Guru	will	pay	dearly	for
this.	Ask	the	old	nut	to	check	his	throat	every	day.	One	morning	he	will	have	no
head.”
Aswathama	grabbed	the	Panchala	Prince	by	the	throat.	“Another	word	about	my
father	and	you	are	a	dead	man,	you	bastard.”
Dhristadyumna’s	 hands	 wrapped	 themselves	 round	 Aswathama’s	 throat	 in	 reply.
The	 two	 young	 warriors	 struggled	 to	 choke	 each	 other	 to	 death.	 Suyodhana	 and
Karna	rushed	between	them,	struggling	to	push	the	duo	apart.
“My	 apologies,	 my	 friend.	 Let	 the	 past	 remain	 in	 the	 past,”	 Suyodhana	 said	 to
Dhristadyumna.
In	 reply,	 the	 Panchala	 Prince	 spat	 viciously	 on	 the	 floor	 and	 walked	 away.
Aswathama	 tried	 to	 follow	 him	 with	 his	 sword	 drawn,	 but	 the	 strong	 arms	 of
Karna	restrained	him.	Shikandi	stood	behind	them,	watching	the	drama	with	a	leer
on	 his	 face.	 Once	 Dhristadyumna	 had	 walked	 away,	 the	 eunuch	 went	 up	 to
Suyodhana.	In	an	effeminate	manner,	Shikandi	touched	the	Crown	Prince.	“Prince,

my	 brother	 wants	 Drona.	 But	 whom	 does	 this	 beautiful	 lady	 want?	 Tell	 me,	 my
handsome	 Prince.	 You	 do	 not	 know?	 How	 unfortunate.	 Well,	 I	 want	 your
Granduncle.	I	am	in	love	with	the	most	eligible	bachelor	in	India.	Wait	till	I	get
Bhishma,”	Shikandi	said	in	a	high-pitched	voice,	imitating	a	coy	woman.	Then	he
walked	away,	blowing	a	kiss	towards	Suyodhana	and	caressing	Karna’s	cheek	in
passing.	Karna	shuddered	at	the	touch.	Suyodhana	shook	his	head	in	dismay.	The
circle	of	hatred	was	growing	bigger	and	bigger	around	them.
***

Inside	the	Grand	Regent’s	chambers,	two	worried	men	discussed	the	future	course
of	action.	Bhishma	wished	Kunti	and	her	sons	to	leave	Hastinapura.	He	was	angry
about	what	had	happened	in	his	absence	and	all	Vidhura’s	attempts	to	pacify	the
Grand	Regent	were	in	vain.	He	said,	Vidhura	did	not	understand	the	consequences
of	 Drona’s	 folly;	 that	 Hastinapura	 was	 fortunate	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 was
still	 incapacitated	 without	 Parashurama,	 or	 else	 the	 act	 of	 insulting	 a	 powerful
vassal	State	would	have	given	them	an	excellent	opportunity	to	move	in.	He	was
sad	about	the	way	caste	was	slowly	creeping	back	into	the	northern	kingdoms	and
wanted	to	cut	down	Dhaumya’s	influence.	Kunti	and	the	Pandavas	had	become	a
rallying	point	for	the	conservatives	and	to	break	this	dangerous	trend,	they	had	to
go.
When	 the	 old	 man’s	 anger	 had	 cooled	 a	 little,	 Vidhura	 put	 forward	 his	 idea.	 He
suggested	 the	 Pandavas	 and	 their	 mother	 could	 be	 moved	 to	 the	 village	 of
Varanavata,	which	was	sufficiently	far	away	from	the	capital.	Bhishma	agreed	and
asked	 the	 Prime	 Minister	 to	 arrange	 it.	 Vidhura	 reminded	 him	 the	 village	 was
backward	 and	 did	 not	 have	 suitable	 dwellings	 for	 the	 members	 of	 the	 Royal
family.
“Spare	no	expense,	Vidhura,	else	Kunti	will	be	telling	everyone	I	have	treated	her
badly.	Build	a	palace	but	do	it	quickly.	Who	can	you	get	to	do	the	job	efficiently?”
“Sir,	I	have	a	man	in	mind.	He	is	efficient	and	fast,	but…”
“But	what?	Call	him	and	start,”	Bhishma	ordered	impatiently.
“Sir,	he	is	very	corrupt	and…”
“Bah!	Corrupt…	who	is	not	corrupt	in	this	land?	Let	him	skim	some	money	and

get	fat,	but	let	the	work	start	today.	Go	on,	call	him!”	Bhishma	snapped	his	fingers.
Vidhura	bowed	and	went	to	do	the	Grand	Regent’s	bidding.
***

“I	am	sure	she	is	behind	it,	Krishna,”	Kunti	said,	handing	a	tumbler	of	buttermilk
to	her	nephew.	“The	King	is	not	that	evil.	But	for	her	manipulations,	he	would	not
have	 asked	 us	 to	 move	 to	 Varanavata.	 Neither	 would	 Pitamaha.	 She	 and	 her
brother	are	determined	to	ruin	our	country.”
“Do	not	blame	Gandhari	for	everything	that	happens	to	you,	Aunt.	About	Shakuni
though,	I	agree.”	Krishna	was	sitting	on	the	 windowsill,	 his	 fingers	 drumming	in
tune	to	some	song	in	his	head.
“When	you	sent	for	me,	I	came	rushing	from	Dwaraka,	fearing	something	terrible.
But	 it	 is	 better	 for	 everyone	 if	 you	 and	 your	 sons	 move	 away	 for	 a	 while.	 The
Grand	Regent	is	right	in	sending	you	to	Varanavata.”
“I	smell	a	conspiracy,	Krishna	and	I	am	afraid.	I	have	no	one	to	turn	to	except	you.
Even	 Arjuna	 has	 fallen	 out	 of	 favour	 with	 Pitamaha	after	 conquering	 Panchala.
Someone	is	poisoning	Pitamaha’s	mind;	maybe	that	Vidhura.”
“Vidhura	is	nobody’s	enemy,	nor	is	he	anyone’s	friend.	He	is	the	only	man	without
any	selfish	interests.”	Krishna	smiled	at	Kunti.
“Then	why	does	he	not	tell	Pitamaha	that	Arjuna	was	only	doing	his	duty	to	his
Guru?”
Krishna	took	a	sip	from	the	tumbler	and	put	it	back	on	the	sill	carefully.	He	smiled
at	Kunti	and	said,	“Arjuna	always	does	his	duty.	That	is	what	I	like	about	him.”
“I	 have	 not	 brought	 up	 my	 sons	 like	 Gandhari.	 Duryodhana	 used	 to	 be	 a	 sweet
child,	but	just	see	what	he	has	grown	up	to	become	–	no	respect	for	his	elders,	no
respect	for	the	scriptures,	and	no	respect	for	traditions.	What	can	we	expect	from
the	sons	of	a	foreign	woman?”
“Aunt,	strategically,	you	made	a	mistake	by	allowing	that	Suta	boy	to	drift	towards
Duryodhana.	 The	 Crown	 Prince	 has	 become	 a	 hero	 now.	 Either	 that	 boy	 should

have	 been	 captured	 and	 handed	 over	 to	 the	 Confederate	 or	 he	 should	 have	 been
brought	 over	 to	 our	 side	 on	 the	 day	 of	 the	 Grand	 Ceremony.	 Before	 I	 could	 do
anything,	Karna	had	become	King	of	Anga.	I	never	expected	Duryodhana	to	be	so
cunning.	 I	 have	 to	 admit	 it	 was	 a	 master	 stroke.”	 Krishna	 looked	 out	 of	 the
window.	 He	 remained	 silent	 for	 some	 time,	 immersed	 in	 his	 thoughts.	 Then	 he
turned	 back	 to	 face	 his	 aunt.	 “Are	 you	 feeling	 well,	 Aunt?	 Why	 do	 you	 look	 so
pale?	Are	you	alright?”
“Nothing…	nothing...	It	is	 just	the	 weather,”	 Kunti	 said,	fanning	her	 flushed	 face
with	a	palm	fan.
“That	Suta	is	going	to	be	trouble,”	Krishna	said,	peering	at	his	aunt	intently.	Kunti
moved	 to	 pick	 up	 the	 tumbler,	 avoiding	 Krishna’s	 eyes.	 “Do	 not	 worry,	 Aunt.
Nothing	will	happen	to	your	sons.	I	will	always	be	there	for	them.	There	is	no	one
dearer	to	me	than	Arjuna.	When	the	time	comes,	I	will	steady	his	hands.	The	way
Duryodhana	is	behaving,	I	am	sure	we	will	be	dragged	into	a	war	soon.”
“I	hate	the	idea	of	war.	If	only…”
“A	 war	 is	 necessary.	 Not	 that	 I	 am	 a	 warmonger	 or	 unaware	 of	 its	 terrible
consequences.	But	the	very	structure	of	society	is	being	shaken	by	Duryodhana	and
his	 friends.	 There	 is	 nothing	 noble	 about	 the	 caste	 system,	 yet	 chaturvarna	 is
something	that	gives	our	society	strength.	What	Duryodhana	proposes	will	lead	to
chaos.	 There	 will	 be	 no	 specialists	 left	 if	 anyone	 can	 become	 anything.	 Society
will	become	weak.	People	will	not	know	what	their	duties	are	and	there	will	be
unhealthy	competition.	It	will	become	a	dog-eat-dog	world.	I	believe	I	have	been
born	with	a	purpose	–	to	preserve	our	social	order.”
“Krishna,	I	do	not	have	the	wisdom	to	understand	your	thoughts.	I	can	only	request
you	 for	 one	 thing.	 My	 sons	 and	 I	 are	 alone	 in	 the	 world.	 Our	 enemies	 are
powerful.	The	King	and	the	Queen	hate	us	and	Duryodhana	will	stoop	to	any	level
to	eliminate	us.	I	want	my	son	to	sit	on	the	throne	of	Hastinapura	at	any	cost.	Will
you	help	me	achieve	that?	More	importantly,	I	do	not	want	any	of	Gandhari’s	sons
to	rule	while	I	am	alive.	I	have	suffered	enough.”
Krishna	stood	up	to	leave.	“I	have	to	leave	now,	Aunt.	I	must	pay	my	respects	to
the	Grand	Regent	and	be	off	to	Dwaraka	early	tomorrow	morning.	It	is	better	you
accept	the	King’s	offer	and	move	to	Varanavata.	I	do	not	rule	out	the	possibility	of

a	conspiracy	to	get	rid	of	you,	but	we	will	find	a	way	out.	To	fight	Duryodhana
you	need	 powerful	 friends.	 Unfortunately,	 Arjuna	 has	 made	 Dhrupada	 an	 enemy
for	 Guru	 Drona’s	 sake.	 Let	 me	 see	 whether	 something	 can	 be	 done	 there.	 I	 will
drop	in	at	Panchala	on	my	way	back	and	try	to	make	amends.	Go	to	Varanavata.
Play	 the	 game.	 Be	 ruthless	 in	 your	 execution.	 Do	 not	 hesitate.	 Survival	 is	 the
biggest	 dharma.	 The	 scriptures	 say,	 nothing	 is	 a	 sin	 during	 danger.	 It	 is	 called
apat	dharma.	Think	and	you	will	find	a	way	out.”
“Be	with	us,	Krishna.	We	do	not	have	anyone	else.”
“Of	 course,	 Aunt.	 I	 will	 be	 with	 you	 and	 your	 five	 sons	 to	 the	 last.”	 Krishna
touched	his	aunt’s	feet	and	moved	towards	the	door.
“Krishna,	I	have…	No,	it	is	nothing…”
Krishna	 bowed	 and	 went	 away.	 Somehow,	 Krishna’s	 promise	 that	 he	 would
protect	her	five	sons	failed	to	calm	Kunti’s	turbulent	mind.
***

A	 few	 days	 later,	 in	 the	 dead	 of	 night,	 the	 Gandhara	 Prince	 woke	 with	 a	 jolt.
Someone	was	gently	tapping	on	his	door.	Cursing	the	interruption	to	his	sleep,	he
fumbled	for	his	dagger,	found	it,	and	hid	it	in	the	folds	of	his	dhoti.	He	picked	up
the	 small	 lamp	 from	 the	 table	 and	 cautiously	 opened	 the	 door.	 Purochana	 stood
outside.	“What	the	hell?”	Shakuni	cursed	again,	thinking	the	bureaucrat	had	come
to	collect	his	payment.
Purochana	 walked	 in	 and	 sat	 down	 on	 Shakuni’s	 bed.	 He	 pummelled	 the	 soft
pillows	and	said,	“Nice	place	you	have	here,	foreigner.”
“What	do	you	want,	buffoon?”	Shakuni	asked	grumpily.
“Aha,	spare	me	that	tone,	foreigner.	You	will	hug	and	shower	me	with	kisses	when
you	hear	what	I	have	come	to	say.	No	cheating,	please,	like	the	last	time.	I	want
1000	gold	coins	and	three	times	that	for	any	action	on	it,	okay	foreigner?”
Shakuni	 instinctively	 knew	 it	 was	 important.	 This	 serpent	 would	 not	 have	 dared
wake	him	so	late	at	night	otherwise.	“Agreed,”	he	said	and	took	the	coins	from	a
shelf,	counted	twice,	and	threw	them	onto	the	bed.

Purochana	took	his	time	counting	the	money,	while	Shakuni	fidgeted.	Then	he	told
the	Gandhara	Prince	the	news.	Vidhura	had	given	Purochana	the	task	of	building	a
palace	for	the	Pandavas	and	the	Grand	Regent	had	sanctioned	a	huge	amount	from
the	 treasury	 for	 its	 construction.	 Despite	 himself,	 Shakuni	 let	 out	 a	 yelp	 of	 joy.
Then	 an	 idea	 struck	 the	 Prince	 like	 a	 flash.	 He	 explained	 to	 Purochana	 what	 he
wanted	done.	Purochana	replied	that	building	a	palace	of	lac	was	too	risky.	But
before	the	new	day	dawned,	Shakuni	had	settled	the	deal	for	10,000	gold	coins.
Purochana	left	for	Varanavata	to	begin	work,	without	even	performing	his	morning
ablutions.	His	fortunes	had	changed	at	last.
Bubbling	with	excitement,	Shakuni	could	not	sleep.	He	took	out	his	dice	and	threw
them	onto	the	table	crying,	“Six”.	They	spun	and	came	to	rest	on	double	threes.	He
laughed	 in	 delight.	 The	 dice	 were	 rolling	 nicely.	 If	 things	 went	 as	 planned,	 the
Pandavas	would	be	trapped	in	a	highly	inflammable	palace.	But	he	would	ensure
they	escaped	unhurt.	He	did	not	want	them	to	die.	That	would	have	been	far	too
easy.	In	that	scenario,	Suyodhana	would	ascend	the	throne	in	due	course	and	his
unfortunate	cousins	would	soon	be	forgotten.	He	wanted	the	Pandavas	to	escape
with	the	knowledge	that	their	cousins	were	trying	to	murder	them.	The	conspiracy
to	 murder	the	 Pandavas	 had	 to	 reach	 the	 ears	 of	 that	 fool	 Vidhura.	 Shakuni	 was
sure	the	conscientious	Prime	Minister	would	take	care	of	the	rest.
As	 dawn	 inched	 across	 the	 eastern	 sky,	 painting	 the	 horizon	 saffron,	 Shakuni
turned	his	back	on	the	glorious	sight	and	fell	to	his	knees	for	his	morning	prayers.
Turning	 West,	 he	 prayed	 for	 the	 glory	 of	 his	 motherland.	 Things	 could	 not	 have
looked	better	for	the	foreigner.

20	HOUSE	OF	LAC
sending	 a	 messenger	 to	 Bhishma,	 asking	 for
leave.	When	her	husband	announced	they	were	going	to	visit	the	place	where	their
house	was	to	be	built,	she	could	not	believe	her	ears.	The	boys	were	excited	to
have	 their	 father	 with	 them	 for	 the	 picnic	 and	 the	 humble	 home	 of	 the	 Prime
Minister	of	Hastinapura	was	filled	with	the	enthusiastic	yells	of	his	ten-year-olds.
When	 they	 walked	 to	 the	 gate,	 they	 were	 surprised	 to	 see	 Bhishma’s	 official
chariot	waiting.
VIDHURA	 SURPRISED	 PARSHAVI	 BY	

“Swami,	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 has	 sent	 this	 for	 your	 use.”	 The	 charioteer	 bowed
respectfully	to	the	Prime	Minister.
Vidhura	wanted	to	protest	it	was	a	private	trip	and	not	an	official	one,	but	knew	he
could	not	return	the	chariot	without	offending	the	Grand	Regent.	Parshavi	climbed
in,	 pulling	 her	 boys	 into	 the	 luxurious	 interior.	 Vidhura	 hesitated,	 but	 his	 family
was	already	inside,	so	he	climbed	in	and	the	chariot	moved	forward.
Parshavi	said	to	 her	 husband,	 “Do	 not	 look	 so	 glum.	 You	 are	 not	 committing	 a
crime.	It	is	not	your	official	chariot.	The	Grand	Regent	knows	you	well,	so	he	has
sent	his	own.”	She	tried	to	close	her	ears	to	the	ruckus	created	by	her	sons.	When
they	reached	their	destination,	Parshavi	was	shocked.	“Are	we	going	to	build	our
house	in	this	jungle?”	she	asked	her	husband	as	the	boys	ran	out	to	jump	into	the
stream	 nearby.	 There	 were	 hundreds	 of	 butterflies	 fluttering	 around	 and	 cuckoos
answered	 each	 other	 somewhere	 above	 them.	 Beyond	 the	 excited	 cries	 of	 her
boys,	 she	 could	 hear	 the	 music	 of	 crickets	 and	 the	 chirping	 of	 birds.	 A	 fragrant
breeze	ruffled	her	hair	and	then	fled	to	play	with	the	leaves.
“Don’t	you	like	it?”	Vidhura	asked.
Parshavi	was	close	to	tears.	This	untamed	spot	was	far	from	the	bustling	streets	of
Hastinapura,	 from	 the	 shops	 and	 markets.	 How	 was	 she	 to	 run	 a	 household	 if
Vidhura	shifted	them	to	this	jungle?	It	was	all	right	for	a	picnic,	but...
“I	am	going	to	build	the	house	with	my	own	hands.”	Vidhura	was	rushing	around,

eagerly	pointing	out	where	the	kitchen	would	be,	and	where	his	study.
Parshavi	 smiled,	 feigning	 enthusiasm	 to	 indulge	 him.	 By	 the	 evening,	 he	 had
involved	the	boys	in	his	project	and	it	turned	out	to	be	one	of	the	most	beautiful
days	in	their	lives.	On	the	way	back,	Vidhura	kept	speaking	of	their	dream	house.
Parshavi	listened	without	interrupting	as	the	chariot	sped	along	the	busy	streets	of
Hastinapura.
After	 Vidhura	 had	 seen	 the	 boys	 fall	 asleep,	 something	 he	 could	 rarely	 do,
Parshavi	asked	him,	“Why	don’t	you	talk	to	the	town	architect	and	use	the	palace
masons?”
“Parshavi,	we	are	building	our	home,	not	a	public	building.	It	would	be	wrong	to
use	my	position	for	personal	gain.	Besides,	I	want	to	build	it	with	my	own	hands.
When	it	is	done,	you	will	be	thankful	we	did	not	go	to	any	architect.”
She	 knew	 the	 house	 would	 never	 be	 built,	 not	 in	 her	 lifetime.	 That	 was	 the	 last
time	 her	 husband	 spent	 the	 whole	 day	 with	 them.	 He	 would	 sneak	 away	 to	 the
jungle	whenever	he	could	find	some	spare	time	and	work	on	the	house;	refusing
help	from	his	subordinates	and	advice	from	the	experts.	He	toiled	in	the	hot	sun
and	freezing	cold.	The	boys	accompanied	him	a	few	times	and	then	lost	interest.
Every	monsoon	the	rains	would	bring	down	whatever	he	had	built.	Vidhura	would
curse	the	lack	of	time,	not	his	skill,	and	sulk	for	a	few	days.	Then	he	would	start
building	 the	 house	 again.	 The	 Prime	 Minister’s	 never-ending	 house	 construction
soon	became	a	running	joke	in	Hastinapura.
***

Ekalavya	 was	 in	 a	 bad	 mood.	 His	 aunt	 had	 quarrelled	 with	 him	 again.	 She	 had
been	at	her	irritating	best	ever	since	he	had	resumed	his	practice	with	the	bow.	He
knew	she	was	right	in	blaming	him	for	ignoring	his	cousins	and	her.	After	the	loss
of	his	thumb,	he	had	slowly	emerged	from	his	depression	and	begun	taking	care	of
the	family	by	working	as	a	scavenger,	the	only	job	open	to	a	low	caste	like	him.
He	 detested	 the	 work,	 which	 involved	 cleaning	 toilets	 and	 drains	 and	 carrying
stinking	 human	 waste	 in	 baskets	 on	 his	 head	 and	 dumping	 it	 far	 from	 the	 posh
homes	of	the	nobles.	He	always	felt	unclean,	no	matter	how	many	times	he	bathed.
People	ran	from	him	as	though	the	mere	sight	of	his	dark	body	was	polluting.

Dogs	and	pigs	walked	in	the	streets	and	no	one	cared.	But	the	same	streets	were
cleaned	 with	 holy	 dung	 after	 Ekalavya	 walked	 past.	 His	 very	 footsteps	 were
polluting.	He	hated	his	life,	his	fate,	his	country,	and	his	job.	But	he	knew	it	 was
either	 this	or	 death	 by	 starvation.	 He	 had	 remained	 resigned	 to	 his	 stinking	 life
until	he	saw	what	happened	to	Karna.	It	gave	him	hope	that	there	was	a	future	for
people	who	worked	hard	and	followed	their	dreams,	as	long	as	men	like	Prince
Suyodhana	 existed.	 From	 that	 day,	 he	 was	 relentless	 in	 his	 pursuit	 to	 regain	 his
skill	in	archery,	determined	not	to	let	the	double	handicaps	of	caste	and	the	lack	of
a	thumb,	stand	in	his	way.	Soon,	hunger	crept	back	into	the	poor	Nishada’s	home,
but	the	family	was	powerless	to	stop	the	scavenger	challenging	his	fate.
The	 reason	 for	 the	morning’s	 tiff	 was	 that	 his	 aunt	 wished	 to	 leave	 Hastinapura
and	migrate	to	a	distant	village	called	Varanavata.	Ekalavya	wanted	to	remain	in
Hastinapura.	 Here,	 there	 was	 a	 chance	 that	 someday	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 would
notice	 him	 and	 perhaps	 he	 too,	 would	 become	 an	 important	 person	 like	 Karna.
What	would	he	do	in	a	backward	village	like	Varanavata,	he	asked	his	aunt?	She
bemoaned	the	fact	that	he	had	stopped	caring	for	his	cousins	and	that	she	was	tired
of	trying	to	feed	him.	He	was	always	playing	with	his	bow	and	arrow	instead	of
going	 to	 work.	 No	 one	 was	 willing	 to	 give	 her	 work,	 even	 as	 a	 house	 cleaner,
since	Ekalavya	was	a	scavenger.	How	was	the	family	to	survive	if	he	continued
with	 his	 insane	 obsession?	 She	 kept	 punctuating	 her	 sorrow	 by	 hitting	 her	 chest
and	forehead	with	her	fists.
Ekalavya	screamed	at	her,	saying	she	was	trying	to	live	off	him.	He	cruelly	added
that	while	he	carried	rich	people’s	shit,	she	and	her	fat	children	ate	and	remained
idle.	He	regretted	the	words	as	soon	as	they	were	spoken,	but	it	was	too	late.	His
aunt	 did	 not	 reply.	 She	 wiped	 her	 tears,	 tightened	 the	 small	 cloth	 bundle	 that
contained	 all	 their	 worldly	 possessions,	 and	 cleaned	 her	 youngest	 child	 as	 best
she	could.	She	did	not	heed	Ekalavya’s	apologies	and	pleadings,	and	walked	out
of	the	thatched	hut	with	her	children	and	her	pathetic	bundle.	Ekalavya	ran	behind
her,	trying	to	persuade	her	to	stay,	but	she	said	she	was	going	to	Varanavata	to	see
if	life	offered	anything	better.	Ekalavya	fell	at	her	feet	saying	he	was	sorry.
She	gently	placed	a	work	worn	hand	on	his	head	and	mumbled	a	prayer.	Then	she
said	to	him,	“I	am	not	angry	with	you,	Ekalavya.	But	I	realize	it	is	time	for	us	to
part.	 You	 are	 a	 grown	 man	 and	 I	 have	 done	 my	 duty	 to	 my	 husband’s	 brother.	 I
have	my	own	children	to	feed.	I	cannot	be	a	leech,	sucking	your	blood.	I	did	not
expect	anything	when	I	brought	you	up.	Now,	there	is	nothing	I	can	do	to	aid	you	in

your	 ambition,	 other	 than	 pray.	 May	 Lord	 Shiva	 be	 with	 you	 always.	 May	 your
dreams	come	true.	If	you	wish	to	see	your	cousins	or	me,	come	to	Varanavata.	I
hear	the	Grand	 Regent	has	built	a	great	palace	for	the	righteous	Pandavas	there,
and	 the	 place	 is	 developing	 fast.	 They	 say	 the	 eldest	 Pandava	 is	 now	 called
Dharmaputra	Yudhishtra,	 and	 that	 he	 is	 the	 most	 truthful	 man	 in	 the	 world.	 The
Pandavas	are	friends	of	Krishna,	the	avatar	of	Lord	Vishnu.	I	am	sure	Varanavata
will	be	a	much	better	place	for	us	than	Hastinapura.	This	place	has	been	cruel	to
us.	Here	everyone	treats	us	like	worms.	In	a	place	ruled	by	the	Son	of	Dharma	and
blessed	by	the	good	wishes	of	Krishna,	I	am	sure	there	will	be	some	space	for	a
poor	Nishada	woman	and	her	five	sons.“
Ekalavya	hugged	his	cousins	one	by	one.	The	eldest	was	just	a	few	years	younger
than	Ekalavya.	The	boy	held	his	head	high	while	saying	goodbye	to	his	cousin.	But
when	 Ekalavya	 held	 the	 youngest,	 he	 broke	 down	 in	 tears.	 The	 boy	 was	 nearly
thirteen	 and	 Ekalavya	 had	 started	 training	 him	 in	 archery.	 The	 lad	 showed	 great
promise.	 His	 aunt	 began	 walking	 and	 the	 elder	 children	 reluctantly	 followed.
Ekalavya	took	a	small	knife	from	his	waist	and	handed	it	over	to	the	young	boy,
who	 hesitated	 a	 moment,	 took	 it	 and	 then	 ran	 to	 join	 the	 others.	 The	 Nishada
watched	 his	 only	 relatives	 in	 the	 world	 become	 dots	 on	 the	 distant	 horizon	 and
vanish	from	his	world.
***

The	woman	and	her	sons	walked	for	many	days	before	they	reached	Varanavata.
The	village	was	developing	into	a	town,	but	she	was	rather	disappointed.	She	had
expected	a	larger	place.	The	only	remarkable	building	was	the	huge	palace,	which
looked	 new	 and	 luxurious.	 How	 big	 a	 place	 did	 a	 family	 of	 six	 need,	 she
wondered	as	she	stood	gazing	at	the	dome	glistening	in	the	sun.	She	was	afraid	to
walk	on	the	main	road.	She	was	sure	they	would	be	chased	away	as	unclean.
The	youngest	boy	pulled	at	her	wrist,	wanting	to	have	a	better	look	at	the	palace.
“Mother,	let	us	walk	on	the	road.	Why	are	we	walking	so	far	from	it?	I	want	to	see
the	palace.”
“Who	do	you	think	you	are,	son?	Are	you	a	Brahmin	or	a	Prince	to	walk	on	the
main	road	in	broad	daylight?	We	are	Untouchables	and	we	will	pollute	the	road.”
But	 the	 boy	 would	 not	 give	 up.	 “How	 will	 they	 know,	 mother?	 We	 are	 not	 in

Hastinapura	now.	Nobody	knows	us	here.”
“They	will	know	by	the	colour	of	our	skin,	son.”
The	boy	looked	down	at	his	dark	skin	and	became	silent.	It	was	not	something	he
could	 change.	 The	 woman	 did	 not	 know	 what	 to	 do.	 They	 were	 all	 hungry.	 Six
days	before,	they	had	raided	a	waste	pit	near	a	temple,	in	the	dead	of	night.	There
were	many	leftovers	from	a	feast	held	for	the	Brahmins	the	previous	day,	by	some
pious	 merchant,	 as	 insurance	 against	 his	 sins	 and	 avarice.	 The	 eldest	 boy	 had
stood	 with	 a	 stick	 in	 his	 hand,	 pushing	 away	 the	 growling	 street	 dogs	 as	 his
brothers	and	mother	scavenged	for	food	in	the	pit.	They	had	to	hurry,	as	the	Priests
would	be	coming	soon	to	open	the	temple	for	morning	prayers.	If	anyone	saw	them
near	the	holy	precincts,	there	would	have	been	hell	to	pay.	They	collected	as	much
of	the	leftovers	as	they	could.	The	mother	was	careful	to	leave	some	for	the	street
dogs.	She	knew	the	pain	of	hunger.	The	food	had	sustained	them	for	a	while,	but	in
the	last	two	days,	they	had	not	found	anything	to	eat.
The	 Nishada	 family	 walked	 past	 the	 magnificent	 palace	 and	 reached	 the	 river
flowing	behind	it.	They	stepped	into	the	waters	of	the	Ganga	and	drank	until	their
bellies	almost	burst.	Fish	of	many	shades	swam	around	their	ankles	and	they	soon
forgot	their	hunger.	The	children’s	shouts	of	delight	as	they	chased	the	fish	brought
tears	to	their	mother’s	eyes.	For	a	while,	she	too	forgot	the	scorching	earth	behind
her	and	the	misery	it	harboured.
“Mother,”	someone	called.
The	woman	was	shocked	to	hear	herself	so	addressed.	She	turned,	terrified	to	see
a	 noble-looking	 man	 standing	 with	 his	 palms	 joined	 in	 a	 namaste.	 She
involuntarily	 moved	 back,	 knowing	 she	 was	 closer	 to	 him	 than	 the	 caste	 rules
permitted.	Her	sons	climbed	out	of	the	water	and	the	youngest	ran	to	her,	his	face
was	pale	with	fear.
“Devi,”	 said	 the	 stranger,	 dressed	 in	 fine	 silk	 and	 jewellery,	 addressing	 the
Untouchable	woman	in	her	tattered	clothes.	“I	am	Yudhishtra,	eldest	son	of	King
Pandu.	 My	 mother,	 Kunti	 Devi,	 wishes	 to	 see	 you.	 Will	 you	 come	 to	 our	 home
with	your	sons?”
“Swami,	I	do	not	think	you	have	understood	who	we	are.	We	are	the	lowliest	of

all	castes.	How	can	we	pollute	your	palace	with	our	steps?”	the	Nishada	woman
asked.
“Mother,”	 the	 eldest	 Pandava	 said,	 ignoring	 the	 look	 of	 surprise	 on	 her	 face	 at
being	addressed	in	this	way,	“the	Lord	says	that	service	to	the	poor	is	the	greatest
service	of	all.	Come	and	bless	our	home.”
The	 eldest	 boy	 shrugged	 his	 shoulders	 and	 started	 walking	 towards	 the	 palace.
His	three	brothers	followed.	They	were	thrilled	at	the	chance	to	see	a	real	palace
and	real	Princes.	The	woman	looked	at	her	youngest	son,	gazing	up	at	her	eagerly,
and	then	at	the	kind	expression	on	the	Prince’s	face,	and	nodded	her	assent.	 The
woman	followed	Yudhishtra,	her	youngest	son	beside	her.	She	could	not	believe
her	luck	and	smiled	at	her	boys’	excited	chatter.
A	 shepherd,	 who	 was	 standing	 and	 watching,	 moved	 towards	 the	 woman	 and
whispered	 in	 her	 ear,	 “Don’t	 go	 woman.	 It	 is	 a	 trap.	 Do	 not	 trust	 the	 high	 and
mighty.”	Then	he	turned	and	walked	away.
She	 stood	 for	 a	 moment,	 confused,	 but	 her	 sons	 kept	 walking.	 Finally,	 she
shrugged	and	followed	the	Son	of	Dharma.	As	they	neared	the	palace,	the	guards
bowed	 respectfully	 to	 the	 Prince.	 She	 saw	 their	 eyes	 enlarge	 in	 surprise	 at	 the
group	 of	 Untouchables	 walking	 into	 the	 palace	 behind	 the	 Prince.	 She	 could
almost	hear	their	silent	exclamations	and	lifted	her	head	with	some	pride.	But	as
the	Prince	ascended	the	steps	leading	to	the	main	entrance,	she	hesitated.	Should
they	follow	him?	What	if	they	touched	something	and	polluted	it	and	they	ordered
her	 arrest?	 Yudhishtra	 turned	 and	 smiled.	 Behind	 him,	 the	 woman	 could	 see	 the
lovely	 face	 of	 Dowager	 Queen	 Kunti,	 standing	 with	 her	 handsome	 sons.	 Kunti
folded	her	hands	in	greeting	to	the	Untouchable	woman,	and	her	sons	bowed.
Before	the	Nishada	woman	could	recover	from	the	shock	of	these	nobles	bowing
to	her,	Arjuna	came	running	down	and	caught	hold	of	her	eldest	son’s	wrist.	She
wanted	to	warn	the	warrior	that	her	son	was	a	Nishada	and	he	should	not	touch
low	castes,	but	her	boy	smiled	confidently	up	at	the	greatest	archer	in	the	world
and	ran	up	the	steps	behind	him.	Her	other	sons	followed.	Before	she	knew	it,	her
children	 were	 chatting	 animatedly	 with	 the	 noble	 Princes.	 The	 woman	 slowly
climbed	the	steps	and	stood	before	Dowager	Kunti,	her	head	bowed	in	respect.
“You	 have	 blessed	 us	 with	 your	 presence	 Devi,	 please	 come	 inside.	 We	 have

arranged	a	chamber	for	you	and	your	sons.”	Kunti	led	her	to	a	room	larger	than	the
biggest	home	the	Nishada	woman	had	ever	lived	in.	It	had	a	huge	bed	and	there
were	 bowls	 of	 flowers,	 fruits	 and	 delicacies,	 the	 likes	 of	 which	 she	 had	 never
seen.	Even	though	she	was	starving,	there	was	so	much	food	before	her	that	she
thought	they	would	not	finish	it	all	even	if	they	lived	to	be	a	hundred.
“Devi	Kunti,	what	have	I	done	to	deserve	so	much	kindness?”	the	woman	asked
through	her	tears.
An	enigmatic	smile	appeared	on	Kunti’s	face.	“You	are	serving	a	great	cause.	You
and	your	five	sons	are	serving	dharma.”
“What	 is	 dharma?”	 the	 Untouchable	 woman	 asked	 the	 mother	 of	 five	 great
warriors.
“Perhaps	you	will	 not	understand	it	 just	now	but	do	 not	worry	about	 it.	 Eat	 and
rest.”	Kunti	smiled	again.
At	that	moment,	the	youngest	Nishada	boy	ran	into	the	room.	When	he	saw	Kunti,
he	hesitated	a	moment	and	then	ran	to	his	mother.	She	could	feel	her	son	shivering
in	 fear	 and	 smiled	 weakly	 at	 the	 noble	 woman	 who	 was	 frowning	 at	 the	 child’s
reaction.	The	Nishada	woman	wracked	her	brains	to	find	an	excuse	for	her	son’s
irrational	behaviour.	But	before	she	could,	the	room	filled	with	the	laughter	of	her
other	 sons.	 They	 ran	 into	 the	 room	 shouting	 in	 merriment,	 overturning	 a	 flower
vase	 here,	 and	 breaking	 some	 expensive	 figurines	 there,	 as	 the	 bulky	 Bhima
chased	 them.	 The	 woman	 looked	 fearfully	 at	 Kunti	 and	 was	 relieved	 to	 see	 that
she	too	was	enjoying	the	antics	of	her	sons.
The	 boys	 saw	 the	 delicacies	 spread	 on	 the	 table	 and	 began	 eating	 ravenously.
Kunti	smiled	once	more	and	called	her	huge	son	to	her.	Bhima	desperately	wanted
to	 join	 his	 newfound	 friends	 in	 eating	 the	 delicacies	 and	 sulked	 over	 the	 denied
treat.	He	picked	up	a	few	treats,	hiding	them	in	the	folds	of	his	dhoti.
“Sleep	well.	We	will	speak	tomorrow,”	Kunti	said	to	the	grateful	Nishada	woman
as	she	left	the	room.
Bhima	looked	longingly	 at	 the	 table	 where	 the	 Untouchables	 were	 attacking	 the
food	like	hungry	hyenas.	Sighing	in	frustration,	he	followed	his	mother	out.

She	was	waiting	for	him	outside.	“Throw	away	those	sweets	you	have	taken.”
“But	mother…”	Bhima	sheepishly	brought	forth	the	hidden	sweets.
“Fool!	 Don’t	 you	 know	 they	 are	 laced	 with	 drugs?	 How	 will	 I	 ever	 drive	 some
sense	into	your	head?”	Kunti	grabbed	the	sweets	from	his	hands	and	threw	them
out	of	a	window.
***

The	 Nishada	 woman	 did	 not	 hear	 the	 argument	 between	 Kunti	 and	 her	 son.	 She
held	herself	back	until	they	left,	then	joined	her	sons	in	satiating	her	hunger.	There
was	 a	 faintly	 bitter	 taste	 to	 the	 food,	 but	 she	 ignored	 it.	 She	 had	 tasted	 worse,
having	 often	 fed	 on	 stinking	 throwaways	 during	 her	 miserable	 life.	 With	 every
bite,	she	thanked	her	benefactor,	praying	to	God	to	give	Kunti	and	her	sons’	long
life	and	happiness.	She	did	not	hear	the	small	click	of	the	latch,	locking	her	and
her	 children	 into	 the	 luxurious	 room.	 The	 lucky	 Untouchable	 and	 her	 children
continued	eating,	blissfully	unaware	of	having	been	trapped	in	this	heaven,	while
downstairs;	their	benefactors	took	an	important	decision	regarding	dharma.
***

“Brother,	I	feel	it	is	wrong.	They	are	innocent	and...”	Arjuna	was	trying	to	reason
with	his	eldest	brother.
Yudhishtra	 looked	 at	 his	 mother,	 who	 shook	 her	 head	 in	 despair.	 Bhima	 sat
dreaming	about	food,	not	caring	for	the	intense	debate	going	on.	He	was	a	lucky
man.	 He	 did	 not	 think	 too	 much	 and	 did	 whatever	 his	 mother	 or	 brothers
commanded.	The	whole	debate	about	dharma	simply	bored	him.	But	Arjuna	never
gave	 into	 anything	 without	 an	 argument.	 The	 twins	 sat	 to	 one	 side,	 discussing
women	 and	 wine.	 Bhima	 moved	 towards	 them,	 to	 listen	 to	 their	 far	 more
interesting	conversation.
“Arjuna,	these	Untouchables	lead	miserable	lives.	We	are	doing	them	a	great	good
by	allowing	them	to	die	for	a	worthy	cause.	They	will	thus	be	born	as	Brahmins	in
their	next	life.”	Yudhishtra	tried	to	maintain	his	composure	while	convincing	his
obdurate	brother.
“The	 youngest	 is	 barely	 thirteen.	 It	 is	 cruel	 to	 trap	 these	 innocent	 people	 like

animals,	with	food	as	bait,”	Arjuna	retorted.
“Son,”	 Kunti	 finally	 said	 in	 a	 tired	 voice.	 “We	 were	 lucky	 to	 get	 early	 warning
that	Duryodhana	has	hatched	a	plan	to	burn	us	alive	here.	Had	your	Uncle	Vidhura
not	warned	us,	imagine	what	could	have	happened!	Every	moment	we	remain	here
is	dangerous.	 We	 acted	 on	 Vidhura’s	 message	 and	 checked	 the	 walls	 –	 they	 are
indeed	 made	 of	 lac	 and	 they	 will	 catch	 fire	 faster	 than	 a	 bundle	 of	 dry	 hay.	 I
always	 thought	 Vidhura	 was	 against	 us,	 but	 this	 shows	 we	 cannot	 fathom	 God’s
deep	 and	 mysterious	 ways.	 It	 was	 His	 will	 that	 this	 mother	 and	 her	 five	 sons
arrived	to	act	as	decoys	for	our	‘death’.	Besides,	remember	your	Gurus	teaching
you	about	Apat	dharma.	Nothing	is	considered	wrong	if	it	is	in	self-preservation.
Who	are	we	to	question	His	will?	Dhaumya	will	be	waiting	for	us	at	the	ghat	with
a	boat.	If	we	do	not	act	tonight,	it	may	be	too	late.	Tomorrow,	Duryodhana’s	men
are	planning	to	torch	this	palace	and	roast	us	alive.	But	we	will	outsmart	them	and
do	it	today.”
Arjuna	shook	his	head	in	disagreement	and	appealed	to	 Yudhishtra,	 ignoring	 his
mother’s	words.	“Brother,	if	we	are	sure	Suyodhana	is	behind	this,	let	us	fight	him
like	Kshatriyas,	and	defeat	him	in	the	accepted	manner.”
Yudhishtra	exchanged	glances	with	his	mother.	After	a	long	pause,	he	said	in	a	soft
voice,	 “We	 have	 to	 outwit	 that	 evil	 man	 and	 go	 into	 hiding	 until	 we	 gain	 some
powerful	friends.	We	cannot	go	to	Hastinapura,	as	the	Grand	Regent	is	not	pleased
with	 us.	 We	 must	 do	 this	 Arjuna.	 We	 do	 not	 have	 a	 choice.	 Without	 six	 charred
bodies	 as	 proof	 of	 our	 deaths,	 Duryodhana’s	 spies	 will	 keep	 hunting	 us.	 Let	 the
world	think	we	are	dead	when	they	see	the	unrecognizable	bodies	of	the	Nishada
woman	and	her	five	children.	Think	only	of	your	duty	and	do	not	worry	about	the
consequences.	 They	 will	 die	 for	 a	 great	 cause,	 Arjuna.	 Be	 proud	 to	 be	 the
torchbearer	of	dharma.”
“Brother,”	Sahadeva	interrupted,	“there	will	be	five	bodies	but	the	youngest	child
is	too	small.	It	will	give	rise	to	suspicion.”
“He	 is	 right,”	 Kunti	 said,	 regretting	 not	 having	 thought	 through	 all	 the	 details.
“Yudhishtra,	how	many	guards	are	there?”
“Seven,	mother.”

“Order	a	feast	for	them	inside	the	palace,”	Kunti	said.	“There	will	then	be	enough
bodies	to	create	confusion	among	the	spies.”
“That	is	disgusting!	The	guards	were	sent	by	the	Grand	Regent	for	our	protection.”
Arjuna	stood	up	abruptly.
“Arjuna,”	said	Yudhishtra,	his	patience	wearing	thin,	“what	is	their	primary	duty
as	 guards?	 To	 protect	 us	 from	 danger.	 If	 a	 situation	 arises	 when	 our	 lives	 are
under	 threat,	 is	 it	 not	 their	 dharma	to	 protect	 us,	 even	 at	 the	 cost	 of	 their	 own
lives?	 What	 is	 wrong	 or	 disgusting	 about	 them	 laying	 down	 their	 lives	 for	 us?
They	 will	 just	 be	 doing	 their	 duty	 as	 per	 our	 scriptures;	 nothing	 is	 more	 sacred
than	dying	while	doing	one’s	duty.	Such	people	reach	the	paradise	of	Lord	Vishnu.
In	fact,	we	are	helping	their	souls	leave	this	miserable	world	and	reach	Vaikunta.”
“But…”
“Arjuna,	enough!	Do	not	talk	like	your	cousin	Duryodhana,”	Kunti	also	stood	up,
ending	the	argument.
Arjuna	knew	he	was	defeated.	He	was	a	mere	warrior,	whereas	his	eldest	brother
was	a	learned	man.	He	never	uttered	a	lie,	and	all	the	Brahmins	hailed	him	as	the
epitome	 of	 virtue	 and	 righteousness.	 Arjuna	 left	 the	 room,	 confused	 about	 the
whole	concept	of	dharma.	Maybe	one	day	someone	would	explain	things	to	him
clearly,	so	he	would	not	feel	the	pinch	of	his	conscience	in	doing	what	his	mother
suggested.	He	could	hear	the	gentle	snoring	of	the	Nishada	woman	from	what	had
once	been	his	chamber.	Arjuna	stood	staring	at	the	Ganga	flowing	in	the	distance,
trying	to	ignore	his	thoughts	about	a	poor	mother	and	her	five	children	who	 had
trusted	them.	Arjuna	struggled	with	the	impossible	tangle	of	right	and	wrong.	His
brother	and	mother’s	arguments	made	no	sense	to	him.	They	only	created	immense
sadness	in	his	confused	mind.
The	sun	slowly	sank	into	the	holy	waters	of	the	Ganga	and	the	river	blushed	red
like	a	coy	bride	at	the	touch	of	her	partner.	As	darkness	fell	over	Varanavata	and
mist	enveloped	the	rushes	along	the	banks	of	the	holy	river,	a	dark	figure	alighted
from	the	small	boat	he	had	been	rowing.	He	looked	at	the	brightly	lit	palace	of	the
Pandavas	in	the	distance	and	felt	a	sense	of	pride.	It	looked	solid.	No	one	would
imagine	it	to	be	built	of	lac.	With	this	project	executed,	he	could	now	retire.	He
wanted	 to	 leave	 Hastinapura	 and	 migrate	 to	 a	 city	 where	 money	 was	 respected

above	 other	 things.	 Perhaps	 Heheya,	 on	 the	 West	 coast,	 he	 thought	 dreamily.	 He
also	needed	to	dump	his	ugly	wife	and	get	a	younger	one.	All	the	money	he	had
made	swindling	the	Government	and	the	public,	had	been	buried	in	a	secret	place.
Until	 now,	 he	 had	 lived	 the	 life	 of	 enforced	 penury,	 imitating	 the	 lives	 of	 his
honest	colleagues	in	Government	service.	He	knew	his	reputation	was	not	good,
but	he	was	careful	not	to	leave	behind	any	proof	of	his	activities.	In	this	way,	he
had	weathered	many	inquiries	conducted	by	the	Prime	Minister’s	men.	‘In	another
week	I	will	retire	and	lead	a	wonderful	life	in	the	company	of	lovely	damsels,	in	a
sea-facing	mansion	in	Heheya,’	Purochana	thought.
The	Prince	of	Gandhara	was	a	strange	man.	He	had	sponsored	the	entire	building
of	the	palace	of	lac	for	the	Pandavas.	It	helped	that	Purochana	could	then	sell	the
teak	 wood	 the	 Government	 had	 supplied	 in	 the	 black-market,	 making	 a	 fortune.
Initially,	Purochana	thought	Shakuni	had	hatched	the	plan	to	finish	off	the	Pandavas
and	was	terrified	of	 the	 consequences,	 were	 his	 involvement	to	 become	 known.
He	had	been	furious	when	he	learned	Shakuni	had	leaked	hints	about	the	palace	of
lac	 to	 that	 painfully	 honest	 Prime	 Minister.	 Once	 Vidhura	 had	 worked	 out	 there
was	a	conspiracy,	he	had	informed	the	Pandavas	to	be	vigilant.	It	took	a	great	deal
of	money	for	the	Gandhara	Prince	to	pacify	the	angry	bureaucrat	and	convince	him
to	complete	the	last	step	of	the	operation.
Purochana	 reassured	 himself	 that	 it	 would	 be	 the	 last	 operation	 he	 would
undertake	 for	 that	 bastard.	 Shakuni’s	 plan	 made	 no	 sense	 to	 him.	 The	 foreigner
wanted	 him	 to	 lock	 the	 palace	 gates	 from	 outside	 and	 burn	 down	 the	 palace.
Purochana	 had	 indignantly	 retorted	 that	 he	 was	 no	 murderer.	 The	 Prince	 then
insisted	 that	 he	 open	 the	 gates	 at	 the	 right	 moment	 and	 allow	 the	 Pandavas	 to
escape!	This	was	not	murder,	just	a	prank,	the	foreigner	assured	him.	Purochana
was	relieved.	Once	the	deal	was	negotiated	and	settled,	he	began	dreaming	of	his
retirement.	 He	 could	 now	 live	 a	 life	 of	 luxury.	 Shakuni	 also	 offered	 him	 an
additional	incentive	if	he	agreed	to	tell	the	Pandavas	that	the	fire	had	been	part	of
Suyodhana’s	conspiracy	to	get	rid	of	them.	Purochana	readily	agreed,	sure,	that	the
Pandavas	would	be	grateful	and	even	reward	him	for	his	loyalty.
Purochana	planned	to	burn	down	the	palace	in	the	dead	of	the	following	night.	For
a	day,	he	had	to	hide	somewhere	and	observe	the	movements	of	the	Pandavas.	He
was	careful	to	keep	to	the	shadows	as	he	moved	quietly	towards	the	palace.	The
creepy	silence	that	pervaded	the	place	made	him	 restless	and	jumpy.	There	was
something	sinister	in	the	air.	All	his	instincts	screamed	danger.	He	wanted	to	go

back	to	the	boat	and	row	away	but	the	thought	of	the	huge	incentive	Shakuni	had
promised	made	him	stand	his	ground.	There	were	no	guards	at	the	entrance,	which
was	 strange.	 The	 lights	 had	 gone	 out	 and	 darkness	 enveloped	 the	 palace	 like	 a
shroud.	A	bat	flew	close	to	Purochana’s	head	and	merged	into	the	blackness	of	the
night	as	he	almost	screamed.
Carefully,	 Purochana	 walked	 towards	 the	 palace,	 trying	 to	 keep	 his	 hands	 from
shaking,	silently	cursing	himself	for	having	agreed	to	do	this	reckless	mission	for
the	foreigner.	As	he	neared	the	palace,	he	could	hear	bits	of	conversation	escaping
from	a	shuttered	window.	He	paused	to	listen	but	could	not	make	sense	of	what
was	 being	 said	 except	 for	 someone	 mentioning	 the	 name	 of	 the	 Chief	 Priest	 of
Hastinapura.	 Purochana	 took	 out	 his	 knife	 and	 tried	 to	 prise	 open	 the	 window	 a
little.	He	was	still	trying	to	do	so	when	he	heard	a	door	open.	Despite	his	bulk,	he
quickly	moved	back,	just	in	time	to	see	the	silhouettes	of	a	woman	and	four	men
emerge.	 They	 huddled	 together	 for	 a	 few	 minutes.	 Then	 a	 fifth	 man	 came	 out,
holding	 a	 small	 lamp	 in	 his	 hand.	 The	 woman	 closed	 the	 door	 and	 checked	 the
latch.	She	hurried	away	with	four	of	the	men.	The	man	with	the	lamp	waited	until
they	were	safely	away	and	then	took	some	rags	and	spread	them	around	the	walls
and	pillars	of	the	veranda.	He	poured	oil	onto	the	rags	from	a	large	vessel	he	also
carried.	 He	 stood	 still	 for	 a	 few	 seconds,	 as	 if	 in	 prayer,	 and	 then	 lit	 the	 fuelsoaked	 rags	 with	 the	 flame	 from	 his	 lamp.	 Turning,	 he	 ran	 towards	 his
companions.
Purochana	had	forgotten	for	a	moment	that	the	palace	he	had	made	was	designed
to	 catch	 fire	 in	 an	 instant	 and	 burn	 down	 in	 a	 matter	 of	 minutes.	 An	 explosion
threw	the	fat	bureaucrat	a	few	feet	away,	numbing	him	with	shock.	Before	he	knew
what	had	happened,	the	palace	of	lac	was	engulfed	in	a	roaring	blaze.	In	the	light
of	 the	 burning	 palace,	 Purochana	 recognized	 the	 Pandavas	 running	 towards	 the
river.	He	 could	 also	 see	 a	 boat	 approaching	 the	 ghat.	 Hell!	 The	 Pandavas	 had
escaped	and	outwitted	him.	The	heat	from	the	fire	was	tremendous	and	Purochana
moved	 away,	 trying	 to	 make	 sense	 of	 what	 was	 happening.	 He	 thought	 of
following	the	fleeing	Pandavas,	but	his	mission	was	not	to	kill	them.	It	was	better
to	escape	and	then	claim	he	had	accomplished	his	mission;	get	the	money	from	the
foreigner,	and	vanish.
He	 was	 about	 to	 turn	 back	 when	 a	 woman’s	 scream	 of	 terror	 froze	 his	 feet.	 He
could	see	people	in	flames,	running	inside	the	burning	palace,	desperately	trying
to	 get	 out.	 ‘Unlucky	 bastards,’	 thought	 Purochana.	 He	 was	 turning	 to	 run	 when	 a

child’s	 scream	 changed	 everything.	 He	 was	 shaken	 to	 see	 a	 mother	 desperately
trying	 to	 push	 a	 young	 boy	 through	 a	 window.	 Without	 thinking	 about	 the
consequences,	Purochana	ran	towards	the	burning	palace	instead	of	away	from	it.
“Swami,	 Swami…”	 the	 dark-skinned	 woman	 screamed	 out	 to	 him,	 her	 hair
aflame,	as	she	tried	to	shove	her	child	through	the	burning	window.	The	child	was
crying	in	fear	and	trying	to	slash	the	bars	of	the	window	with	a	small	knife.	The
woman	 was	 obviously	 an	 Untouchable,	 but	 what	 the	 hell,	 a	 child	 was	 in	 danger
and	 he	 had	 to	 do	 something,	 the	 bureaucrat	 thought	 frantically.	 Ignoring	 the	 heat,
Purochana	 ran	 towards	 the	 window.	 ‘Why	 am	 I	 risking	 my	 life	 for	 a	 dirty	 black
urchin?’	 a	 part	 of	 his	 brain	 kept	 screaming.	 However,	 something	 he	 never	 even
knew	existed	in	him,	made	him	remain	rooted	to	the	spot	under	the	window.
Retribution	for	such	acts	of	compassion	is	swift	and	sure	and	it	came	in	the	form
of	 a	 wall	 crashing	 down	 from	 the	 burning	 palace.	 It	 was	 almost	 as	 if	 somebody
high	above	had	pushed	it	down	in	anger.	It	crashed	down	onto	the	civil	servant,
pinning	him	to	the	ground.	He	watched	in	horrified	helplessness	as	fire	engulfed
the	mother	and	child.	As	the	flames	crawled	towards	him	and	began	devouring	his
corpulent	body,	Purochana	thought	sadly	that	not	even	his	wife	knew	where	he	had
hidden	 the	 money	 from	 a	 lifetime	 of	 swindling.	 ‘I	 wasted	 my	 life	 and	 am	 now
dying	for	a	useless	cause,’	was	his	last	thought.
***

Far	away,	a	boat	lay	anchored	in	the	waters	of	the	Ganga.	Dhaumya,	a	couple	of
his	assistants,	and	Kunti	and	her	five	sons,	watched	the	God	of	Fire	devouring	the
palace.	Arjuna	sat	staring	at	his	feet.
“I	 feel	 terrible,	 but	 what	 choice	 did	 we	 have,	 Guru	 Dhaumya?”	 Kunti	 asked,
looking	at	the	burning	palace.
Dhaumya	turned	to	her.	“Devi,	nothing	is	considered	wrong	when	your	own	life	is
in	danger.	But	now	you	have	to	be	careful.	I	hope	the	Great	God	Agni	will	have
devoured	all	the	bodies	beyond	recognition.	Devi	Kunti,	it	was	a	masterstroke	to
get	 those	 Nishadas.	 Leave	 the	 rest	 to	 me.	 We	 will	 spread	 the	 rumour	 that	 the
Pandavas	died	in	the	fire.	Keep	a	low	profile	until	you	gain	powerful	friends.	Go
to	Panchala.	There	is	going	to	be	a	swayamvara	there.	 The	 King	 will	 be	 giving
away	 the	 hand	 of	 his	 daughter	 to	 the	 best	 archer.	 Arjuna	 can	 easily	 win	 the

beautiful	Princess	Draupadi	as	his	wife.”
Dhaumya’s	words	did	not	evoke	any	response	from	the	gloomy	Arjuna.	Kunti	and
the	Head	Priest	exchanged	glances	while	Yudhishtra	shook	his	head	in	frustration.
Somebody	 had	 to	 explain	 the	 complexities	 of	 dharma	 and	 karma	 to	 his	 naïve
brother.
The	Priest	sat	down	beside	Arjuna.	The	handsome	Prince	immediately	stood	up,
rocking	the	boat.	“We	trapped	them	like	animals!”
“Prince,	you	have	nothing	to	fear.	Think	of	them	as	celestial	beings	from	the	court
of	 Indra,	 who	 came	 to	 earth	 because	 of	 a	 curse.	 They	 were	 born	 Untouchables
because	 they	 had	 disrespected	 some	 Maharishi.	 But	 their	 dying	 in	 the	 cause	 of
dharma	has	now	expiated	their	sins.	It	is	a	good	story	and	our	fellow	citizens	will
eagerly	believe	it.	We	will	repeat	it	in	all	the	temples	and	soon	there	will	be	fools
dying	 to	 uphold	 its	 veracity.”	 Everyone	 except	 Arjuna	 laughed	 at	 Dhaumya’s
words.
“I	wonder	what	disguise	we	should	take	on?”	Yudhishtra	asked	the	Chief	Priest.
Dhaumya	replied	without	hesitation.	“Disguise	yourselves	as	Brahmins.	You	will
then	get	food	whenever	you	want,	and	respect,	even	if	you	don’t	want	it.”
As	 the	 sun	 peeped	 in	 the	 Eastern	 sky,	 they	 freed	 the	 boat	 and	 started	 rowing
towards	 Panchala.	 Some	 way	 down	 the	 river,	 they	 passed	 a	 ferryboat,
overflowing	with	people.	The	Pandavas	did	not	see	the	dark	young	man	sitting	on
the	prow,	bound	for	Varanavata.	But	the	Nishada’s	eyes	never	left	them.

21	SWAYAMVARA
at	 the	 ghat	 and	 like	 all	 the	 other
passengers,	his	eyes	went	to	the	smouldering	remains	of	the	palace.	He	had	heard
rumours	 in	 the	 ferryboat	 that	 the	 Pandava	 palace	 at	 Varanavata	 had	 gone	 up	 in
flames	the	previous	night	and	that	the	Pandavas	and	their	mother	had	died	in	the
mishap.	People	were	talking	excitedly,	pointing	at	the	black	smoke	snaking	its	way
towards	 heaven,	 and	 commenting	 on	 the	 misfortune	 of	 the	 poor	 Pandavas.
Ekalavya	followed	the	group	walking	towards	the	charred	ruins.	He	was	confused
about	the	identity	of	the	Priest	he	had	seen	in	the	boat	they	had	passed,	but	he	was
almost	sure	the	man	sitting	with	bowed	head	had	been	Arjuna.
EKALAVYA	 DISEMBARKED	 FROM	 THE	 BOAT	

Ekalavya	 sorely	 missed	 his	 family	 when	 they	 left.	 He	 had	 tried	 to	 suppress	 the
urge	 to	 visit	 them	 by	 punishing	 himself	 with	 long	 sessions	 of	 gruelling	 archery
practice.	 But	 the	 impish	 smile	 of	 his	 little	 nephew	 kept	 haunting	 him.	 On	 an
impulse,	he	started	towards	Varanavata,	curious	to	see	how	they	were	faring	in	the
land	of	the	righteous	Pandavas.
There	was	nothing	much	left	of	the	palace	when	Ekalavya	reached	it.	The	air	was
foul	with	the	smell	of	burnt	flesh	and	hair,	and	there	were	puddles	of	dirty	water
here	 and	 there.	 People	 stood	 in	 groups,	 covering	 their	 noses	 with	 their	 hands	 to
ward	 off	 the	 smell	 of	 death.	 A	 few	 guards	 were	 directing	 the	 chandalas	 in
extricating	the	bodies.	Some	women	screamed	and	cried	out	whenever	a	charred
body	 was	 carried	 to	the	 bullock	cart	waiting	a	few	feet	away.	People	sucked	in
their	breaths	as	the	chandalas	brought	out	the	body	of	a	woman.	Sniffs	and	sobs
punctuated	 the	 uneasy	 silence	 of	 death.	 “Rajamata	 Kunti,”	 someone	 murmured.
The	chandalas	brought	out	the	bodies	of	her	sons.	The	crowd	pushed	and	jostled
to	have	a	look	at	the	dead	Pandavas.	Ekalavya	thought	the	bodies	looked	too	small
to	be	those	of	the	well-built	Pandavas.	But	who	knew	what	fire	could	do?
“Where	 is	 Bhima?”	 a	 man	 near	 Ekalavya	 wondered	 aloud.	 The	 next	 corpse	 to
come	 from	 the	 smouldering	 ruins	 answered	 his	 question.	 “Bhima,”	 the	 crowd
cried,	 a	 hint	 of	 pleasure	 tinting	 their	 horror.	 A	 few	 women	 let	 out	 high-pitched
wails.	 The	 bearers	 of	 the	 fat	 bureaucrat’s	 charred	 body	 puffed	 and	 panted,

struggling	 under	 the	 dead	 man’s	 weight.	 They	 heaved	 the	 body	 into	 the	 cart,
pushing	 it	 to	 one	 side	 to	 make	 room	 for	 more	 bodies.	 It	 was	 then	 that	 Ekalavya
saw	 it.	 Something	 gleamed	 on	 the	 chest	 of	 one	 of	 the	 corpses.	 A	 shiver	 passed
through	the	Nishada’s	heart	and	he	became	numb	with	grief.	He	wanted	to	deny	it,
but	it	was	unmistakable.	With	terrified	steps,	he	moved	towards	the	cart	in	which
they	had	piled	the	bodies.
Next	to	the	dead	Purochana,	lay	the	charred	body	of	Ekalavya’s	youngest	nephew.
Even	 in	 death,	 the	 boy	 held	 the	 knife	 Ekalavya	 had	 given	 him	 on	 parting.	 The
Nishada’s	 tears	 began	 to	 flow	 when	 he	 saw	 it	 held	 securely	 in	 those	 charred
fingers.	The	chandalas	had	not	noticed	him	until	Ekalavya	tried	to	pull	the	body
out	 of	 the	 cart.	 They	 pushed	 him	 away.	 Whatever	 valuables	 the	 dead	 bodies
carried	were	theirs	by	right.	It	was	one	of	the	few	incentives	for	working	in	this
macabre	profession.	They	were	already	irritated	that	the	bodies	of	the	Princes	and
the	Rajamata	had	not	yielded	anything	worthwhile.	They	were	not	about	to	allow
another	Untouchable	to	rob	them	of	their	dues.
When	 Ekalavya	 rushed	 towards	 his	 nephew	 again,	 one	 of	 the	 chandalas	 hit	 him
with	his	long	stick.	Others	arrived	and	they	thrashed	the	Nishada	without	mercy.
Ekalavya	was	in	no	mood	to	fight	and	their	blows	were	soothing	in	a	way,	making
him	 temporarily	 forget	 the	 ache	 deep	 in	 his	 heart.	 When	 they	 were	 satisfied	 the
Nishada	 would	 not	 wake	 up	 anytime	 soon,	 they	 dragged	 him	 like	 a	 sack	 and
dumped	him	under	a	tree.
The	 cart	 carrying	 the	 bodies	 started	 with	 a	 jerk.	 It	 rolled	 on,	 creaking	 and
squeaking	on	its	journey	towards	the	cremation	grounds	near	the	river.	The	head
chandala	hacked	 the	 knife	 from	 the	 corpse.	 It	 was	 a	 cheap	 knife	 but	 perhaps	 he
could	 get	 a	 mug	 of	 country	 liquor	 for	 it,	 he	 thought	 as	 he	 tucked	 it	 into	 his
waistband.
***

When	Ekalavya	returned	to	consciousness,	it	was	late	afternoon.	The	funeral	pyres
had	died	down	some	time	ago	and	the	Priests	had	gone	home	after	a	funeral	feast
hosted	 by	 the	 head	 of	 the	 village.	 The	 grief	 Ekalavya	 felt	 was	 more	 unbearable
than	the	pain	in	his	limbs.	He	tried	to	get	up	and	was	surprised	to	find	two	strong
hands	assisting	him.	He	looked	up	at	the	dark	face	of	a	shepherd,	smiling	at	him.
“Aswasena,”	 Ekalavya	 mumbled,	 as	 recognition	 dawned.	 His	 Naga	 friend	 from

Takshaka’s	camp	hugged	him	tight.
“I	 tried	 to	 warn	 her,	 but	 she	 did	 not	 listen,”	 Aswasena	 said	 to	 the	 confused
Nishada.	 “Ekalavya,	 our	 people	 have	 been	 watching	 you	 ever	 since	 you	 started
practicing	archery	again.	The	great	leader	had	given	up	on	you	after	you	sacrificed
your	 thumb	 to	 please	 Guru	 Drona.	 But	 your	 determination	 to	 fight	 back	 has
impressed	Takshaka.	He	keeps	talking	about	you	in	all	his	speeches	and	now	you
are	a	hero	to	all	the	young	Nagas	in	camp.	He	wants	to	meet	you.	He	does	not	bear
any	ill	will	towards	you	for	deserting	the	cause.	He	always	said	you	would	come
back	once	you	learnt	there	was	no	future	for	people	like	us	in	this	country,	unless
we	overturn	the	caste	system.	What	happened	to	you	and	your	family	is	not	unique.
For	 thousands	 of	 years	 our	 people	 have	 suffered	 injustice.	 Ekalavya,	 come	 with
me	 to	 Khandiva	 forest.	 It	 is	 the	 only	 way	 for	 the	 downtrodden,	 the	 poor,	 the
oppressed;	 for	 people	 like	 us.	 For	 the	 sake	 of	 your	 murdered	 family,	 for	 your
hacked	off	thumb;	for	our	wretched	people,	come	back	to	Khandivaprastha.”
Ekalavya	 looked	 at	 his	 friend.	 “You	 sound	 like	 Takshaka,	 with	 your	 bombastic
words	and	dramatic	expressions.”
“Will	you	come?”
Ekalavya	 looked	 at	 his	 right	 hand	 with	 its	 four	 fingers.	 The	 ghost	 thumb	 itched.
The	image	of	his	cousin’s	hand	holding	a	knife	flashed	through	his	mind.	He	stood
up,	ignoring	the	pain	that	shot	through	his	limbs,	and	stared	into	the	Naga’s	face.
“Yes,”	he	said.
A	shout	of	joy	came	from	Aswasena	as	he	hugged	his	friend.	As	night	fell,	the	two
friends	began	their	long	journey	towards	the	dark	jungles	of	Khandiva.
***

“I	do	not	know	whether	my	heart	beats	with	happiness	or	fear.”
Gandhari	could	feel	the	trembling	in	her	husband’s	cold	fingers.	The	world	around
them	was	dark.	Vidhura	had	just	paid	them	a	visit.	Though	the	King	had	tried	to
appear	unmoved	before	the	Prime	Minister,	the	moment	he	heard	him	walk	away,
he	had	turned	towards	his	wife.	She	did	not	say	anything,	nor	did	she	wish	to.	She
tried	to	pray	but	the	comforting	words	eluded	her.	There	was	only	numbness	in	her
mind.

She	had	felt	Dhritarashtra’s	silent	satisfaction	when	Vidhura	told	them	the	news.
But	dread	had	spread	through	her	veins.	She	wondered	whether	her	husband	had
understood	what	the	Prime	Minister	was	hinting	at.	When	Vidhura	left,	his	words
hanging	 ominously	 in	 the	 air,	 Dhritarashtra	 had	 asked	 Gandhari,	 “Could
Suyodhana	really	do	something	like	that?”
For	 Dhritarashtra,	 their	 firstborn	 could	 do	 no	 wrong.	 But	 Gandhari	 was	 not	 so
sure.	She	moved	away	from	her	husband,	trying	to	find	the	window	and	catch	the
softness	 of	 the	 breeze	 on	 her	 face.	 She	 could	 hear	 his	 laboured	 breathing.	 Poor
man!	 When	 Bhishma	 had	 brought	 her	 to	 this	 palace	 so	 many	 years	 ago,	 she	 had
been	shocked	to	see	the	man	who	was	to	marry	her.	No	wonder	Bhishma	had	been
compelled	 to	 ransack	 kingdoms	 and	 steal	 away	 brides	 for	 the	 Princes	 of
Hastinapura.	Gandhari	still	remembered	the	horror	of	seeing	Dhritarashtra	for	the
first	time	and	shuddering	at	his	sightless	eyes.	She	had	kept	an	arm	around	Shakuni
as	she	viewed	the	splendour	around	them,	trying	to	protect	her	brother	from	evil
men.	 She	 willed	 herself	 to	 remain	 unflinching	 before	 the	 gaze	 of	 the	 curious
courtiers.	She	could	hear	the	whispers	of	the	men	and	women	who	had	assembled
to	see	the	exotic	gift	Bhishma	was	giving	his	blind	nephew.	She	could	also	sense
their	sympathy	and	hear	their	clicking	tongues.	With	a	vehemence	that	bordered	on
insanity,	she	had	torn	a	strip	from	her	shawl	and	tied	it	over	her	eyes.	From	that
day,	she	had	shared	Dhritarashtra’s	blindness.
“Daughter,	why	are	you	doing	this?”	Even	now,	she	could	clearly	hear	Bhishma’s
shocked	words.	The	agony	and	guilt	in	his	words	had	given	her	some	satisfaction.
It	still	did	after	all	these	years.	The	images	of	that	day	remained	vivid.	There	had
been	 a	 time	 when	 she	 had	 shared	 her	 brother’s	 dream	 of	 destroying	 the	 country
that	 had	 stolen	 her	 sight.	 But	 it	 was	 strange	 how	 this	 dry	 and	 dusty	 land	 seeped
into	 the	 mind.	 The	 smell	 of	 spices,	 the	 music	 of	 temple	 bells,	 the	 fine	 dust	 that
seemed	to	enter	every	pore	of	the	body	in	the	hot	sultry	summers,	had	claimed	her
heart.	The	dreams	of	destruction	and	revenge	had	vanished	long	ago.	The	man	she
had	shrunk	from	had	become	her	husband.	Was	it	love	or	sympathy	for	an	insecure
and	 handicapped	 man?	 She	 was	 afraid	 to	 ask	 that	 question	 of	 herself.	 When	 she
had	taken	the	terrible	vow	to	bind	her	eyes,	she	had	wanted	only	to	hurt	Bhishma
with	 that	 gesture.	 She	 had	 thought	 she	 would	 never	 forgive	 him	 for	 what	 he	 had
done	 to	 her	 father	 and	 her	 homeland.	 Yet,	 respect	 for	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 had
crawled	into	her	mind	over	the	years	and	refused	to	go	away	despite	her	efforts.
“They	once	cheated	me	of	my	inheritance	and	made	my	brother	Pandu	sit	on	the

throne	while	I	stood	by	like	a	lackey,”	Dhritarashtra	said,	gritting	his	teeth.	“I	am
blind,	 I	 see	 only	 darkness…	 even	 the	 crown	 I	 wear	 is	 a	 gift	 from	 my	 brother…
They	gave	me	my	birthright	as	if	bestowing	a	favour	on	me,	after	Pandu	died.	But	I
am	just	a	figurehead.	Bhishma	and	Vidhura	rule	this	kingdom.”
Gandhari	heard	him	get	up	and	find	his	mace.	She	gripped	her	hands	together.	She
could	 not	 bear	 to	 think	 of	 him	 as	 weak	 and	 vulnerable.	 He	 was	 the	 King	 of
Hastinapura,	he	ruled	a	kingdom	as	large	as	a	continent,	yet	he	was	afraid	of	his
own	 shadow.	 He	 was	 deferential	 to	 all,	 polite	 and	 soft-spoken,	 weighing	 his
words	before	speaking	them.	But	in	their	private	chamber,	he	was	a	different	man.
Gandhari	 knew	 what	 was	 coming	 now;	 she	 was	 familiar	 with	 that	 sound.	 Her
husband	was	venting	his	 frustrations	 on	the	iron	replica	of	Bhima.	It	had	been	a
gift	 to	 his	 firstborn,	but	 Suyodhana	 had	 never	 used	 it.	 It	 now	 stood	 in	 the	 royal
bedchamber.	Clang!	Dhritarashtra’s	mace	hit	the	iron	mannequin	with	great	force.
“Will	you	stop	this?”	Gandhari	asked,	her	voice	filled	with	pain.
There	was	a	pause.	Then	he	resumed	hitting	the	statue	with	a	vengeance,	as	if	to
prove	 to	 himself	 that	 he	 was	 a	 King	 with	 some	 power,	 at	 least	 in	 his	 bedroom.
Gandhari	 walked	 towards	 him,	 unafraid	 of	 the	 mace	 he	 wielded.	 He	 stopped,
sensing	her	presence	near	him.	She	prised	the	mace	from	his	hands	and	made	him
sit	on	the	bed.	He	buried	his	head	on	her	shoulder	in	defeat.	But	Gandhari	lifted
his	 face	 and	 felt	 it	 with	 her	 fingers.	 He	 was	 so	 vulnerable	 in	 her	 hands	 that	 she
wanted	to	weep.	The	women	of	Gandhara	never	cried,	she	reminded	herself.	How
much	 indignity	 this	 man	 had	 suffered,	 she	 thought,	 as	 she	 stroked	 her	 husband’s
thick	 hair.	 It	 felt	 like	 Suyodhana’s.	 Perhaps	 it	 had	 turned	 grey	 or	 even	 white	 by
now,	but	it	felt	and	smelt	like	her	son’s.	In	their	world,	colour	did	not	matter.	She
tried	to	imagine	what	her	firstborn	looked	like	now.
“Now	our	son	will	get	what	is	rightfully	his.	He	is	not	blind	like	us,	Gandhari.	I
cannot	 say	 this	 to	 anyone	 else,	 but	 you	 will	 understand.	 I	 feel	 relieved	 the
Pandavas	are	dead.	I	hope	it	was	an	accident	and	not	a	conspiracy	by	our	son.	I	do
not	believe	he	would	do	anything	like	that.	Suyodhana	has	never	been	cruel.	But
do	you	think	he	did…?”
Gandhari	did	not	say	anything.	She	 wanted	 to	 believe	 her	 husband.	 Surely,	 their
son	 would	 never	 do	 anything	 so	 ignoble.	 But	 what	 about	 Shakuni?	 Poor	 Kunti!
Had	she	really	died?	What	a	horrible	death	for	her	and	her	sons.	Had	she	died	or

was	it	just	another	trick?	Gandhari	despised	her,	but	somehow	she	found	it	hard	to
believe	Kunti	had	died.	Kunti	was	a	survivor.	But	Vidhura	had	said	Kunti	and	her
five	sons	had	died	in	the	fire	that	gutted	their	new	palace.	Gandhari	felt	ashamed
of	the	thoughts	that	haunted	her	mind.	The	small	bubble	of	joy	that	threatened	to
grow	and	fill	her	mind	was	unsettling.	She	shook	her	head,	as	if	to	remove	such
thoughts.
Dhritarashtra	 was	 restless.	 He	 stood	 up,	 pushing	 Gandhari’s	 hands	 away,	 and
searched	for	his	mace.	Once	again,	the	room	echoed	to	the	sound	of	metal	crashing
on	 metal.	 Gandhari	 sat	 on	 the	 bed,	 trying	 to	 shut	 out	 the	 hatred	 emanating	 from
Dhritarashtra’s	mace.	A	cold	fear	began	creeping	into	her	body.	She	could	shut	out
the	sights	of	India,	and	could	close	her	ears	to	her	husband’s	frustration,	but	how
would	she	cope	with	the	dread	spreading	through	every	nerve.	With	utter	clarity
she	knew	that	Vidhura	was	all	wrong,	and	her	son	blameless.	She	was	sure	Kunti
would	 come	 back	 with	 her	 sons	 and	 suck	 them	 all	 into	 something	 unimaginable.
She	wanted	to	see	Suyodhana,	to	keep	him	nearby.	For	once,	she	wanted	to	see	his
face	instead	of	feeling	it	with	her	fingers.	In	the	world	inhabited	by	Shakuni	and
Krishna,	she	knew	her	son	was	all	alone,	fighting	a	fool’s	battle.	She	wanted	to
hold	and	protect	her	son	from	the	world.
***

The	news	of	the	Pandavas’	deaths	spread	like	wildfire.	Dhaumya’s	men	fanned	the
flames	of	the	rumours	that	Duryodhana	had	murdered	his	cousins.	There	was	anger
in	the	streets	and	Durjaya’s	men	 used	 it	 effectively	 to	 trigger	 a	 few	 riots.	 There
was	 widespread	 destruction	 of	 public	 property,	 arson	 and	 looting.	 The	 Crown
Prince	 was	 heckled	 in	 the	 streets.	 The	 Prime	 Minister	 went	 to	 Varanavata	 to
discover	the	truth.	But	Bhishma	summoned	him	back	to	the	capital	when	the	riots
started	 spreading	 to	 the	 villages.	 Vidhura	 had	 to	 discontinue	 his	 house-building.
The	 public	 execution	 of	 some	 rioters	 helped	 bring	 back	 sanity	 and	 the	 efficient
Prime	Minister	restored	peace	and	order	within	a	week.	Durjaya’s	men	slithered
back	into	their	hiding	places.	They	would	remain	in	their	sleeper	cells	until	their
leader	called	them	to	action.
Suyodhana	was	frustrated	at	this	turn	of	events.	He	loved	being	among	the	people
and	 often	 visited	 the	 nooks	 and	 corners	 of	 the	 kingdom	 he	 was	 destined	 to	 rule.
The	 love	 and	 affection	 the	 common	 people	 showed,	 recharged	 him.	 However,
things	 turned	 for	 the	 worse	 following	 the	 rumours	 of	 the	 Pandavas’	 deaths.	 He

knew	people	were	aware	of	their	mutual	antipathy	but	he	could	not	accept	that	so
many	thought	he	would	stoop	to	the	level	of	causing	his	cousins’	deaths.	Once,	a
mob	surrounded	him	in	the	street	and	threw	eggs	at	him.	They	would	have	lynched
him	had	a	beggar	and	dog	not	suddenly	appeared	on	the	scene	and	stood	between
the	angry	mob	and	the	Prince,	until	the	guards	whisked	him	away	to	safety.
After	 that	 incident,	 Bhishma	 had	 ordered	 him	 not	 to	 venture	 out	 of	 the	 palace.
Though	 almost	 a	 year	 had	 passed	 since	 those	 dark	 days,	 it	 still	 hurt	 when	 he
thought	about	it.	The	crowd	had	screamed,	‘Killer	Duryodhana’	at	the	top	of	their
voices.	The	nickname	‘Duryodhana’	hurt	more	than	the	tag	‘killer’	did.	He	missed
the	company	of	his	friend	Karna,	who	was	away	in	Anga,	doing	an	efficient	job	of
putting	his	fiefdom	in	order.	Sushasana	had	formed	his	own	group	of	friends	and
the	 brothers	 had	 drifted	 apart	 and	 no	 longer	 spent	 much	 time	 together.	 Sushala,
now	betrothed	to	King	Jayadratha	of	Sindh,	was	floating	in	her	own	happy	world
and	no	longer	came	to	his	room	to	talk.	Aswathama	remained	the	only	companion
in	his	enforced	confinement.	In	his	loneliness,	his	yearning	 for	Subhadra	became
more	acute.	She	had	not	replied	to	any	of	his	messages	after	Graduation	Day,	and
that	added	to	his	worries.	He	had	written	to	Jayadratha,	since	Sindh	was	closer	to
Dwaraka	than	Hastinapura.	He	had	also	written	to	Balarama,	his	Guru,	for	advice
and	eagerly	awaited	a	reply	from	the	Yadava	leader.
A	guard	arrived	and	bowed	to	Suyodhana	before	handing	over	a	sealed	message.
It	 was	 an	 invitation	 to	 the	 Princess	 of	 Panchala’s	 swayamvara.	 Indifferently,	 he
threw	it	onto	the	table	after	glancing	at	it,	his	thoughts	returning	to	Subhadra.	What
did	her	silence	mean?	He	had	to	go	to	Dwaraka	and	see	her.	Perhaps	things	would
turn	out	right	if	he	formally	asked	for	her	hand.	Yes,	that	was	it.	She	was	shunning
him	because	he	had	not	taken	the	initiative	to	take	the	relationship	further.	Excited,
he	went	to	his	writing	desk	and	wrote	a	letter	to	Balarama,	asking	for	Subhadra’s
hand	in	marriage.	He	despatched	it	with	his	personal	courier	to	Dwaraka,	and	felt
happy	and	relieved.
Suyodhana	casually	re-read	the	invitation	to	Draupadi’s	swayamvara.	It	required
the	 suitors	 to	 shoot	 a	 metal	 fish	 revolving	 high	 in	 the	 air,	 by	 looking	 at	 its
reflection	in	a	small	pool	of	water.	He	smiled	at	the	ridiculous	ways	people	chose
to	 select	 grooms	 for	 their	 daughters.	 Was	 Draupadi	 a	 trophy	 to	 be	 won	 in	 a
competition?	 He	 remembered	 the	 beautiful	 Princess	 and	 thought	 her	 too	 spirited
and	intelligent	to	be	auctioned	off	to	the	most	skilled	archer.	Was	there	no	place
for	 love	 in	 her	 life?	 Karna.	 It	 came	 to	 him	 in	 a	 flash.	 Suyodhana	 slapped	 his

forehead.	 What	 sort	 of	 a	 friend	 was	 he	 if	 he	 was	 capable	 of	 forgetting	 the	 night
they	 had	 spent	 in	 Panchala	 and	 the	 look	 of	 love	 and	 longing	 in	 both	 Karna	 and
Draupadi’s	 eyes?	 Shaking	 off	 his	 lethargy,	 he	 called	 for	 Aswathama	 and
Sushasana,	and	paced	the	room,	waiting	in	growing	excitement.	When	they	came,
he	showed	them	the	invitation	and	waited.
“It	is	bad	news	for	our	friend,”	Aswathama	said.
“What	 do	 you	 mean,	 Aswathama?”	 Suyodhana	 clicked	 his	 tongue	 irritably.	 “Do
you	 know	 any	 archer	 other	 than	 Karna,	 who	 can	 win	 this	 competition?	 The	 only
person	who	can	give	him	some	competition	is	you.”
“I	have	no	intention	of	getting	beaten	up	by	Karna.	The	issue	is,	did	he	even	get	an
invitation?”
“Why	should	he	not	get	an	invitation?	He	is	the	King	of	Anga,	do	you	mean	to	say
the	Panchalas	will	not	invite	him	because	of	his	caste?”
Aswathama	 gazed	 at	 his	 friend	 in	 silence,	 watching	 Suyodhana	 grow	 angrier	 by
the	minute.
“Sushasana,	get	our	troops	 ready.	We	are	going	to	Draupadi’s	swayamvara,	 and
we	are	taking	Karna	with	us.	Send	a	message	to	him	to	join	us	on	the	way.	Send
another	 to	 Jayadratha.	 If	 anybody	 dares	 to	 insult	 Karna,	 we	 will	 teach	 them	 a
lesson	they	will	never	forget.”
By	that	evening,	the	arrangements	had	been	made	and	Suyodhana	and	his	friends
started	out	with	a	large	number	of	troops	for	Panchala.	When	Karna	joined	them
on	the	way,	they	were	relieved	to	find	Aswathama’s	fears	were	unfounded.	Karna
showed	them	his	invitation	from	the	Panchala	King.	The	five	friends	spent	some	of
their	happiest	moments	together,	on	this	journey,	racing	each	other	on	their	horses,
tasting	the	finest	wines,	talking	to	people,	visiting	remote	villages	and	hermitages,
hunting	 game	 in	 the	 forest,	 and	 singing	 and	 dancing	 under	 the	 skies.	 Karna	 was
teased	repeatedly	and	Sushasana	and	Aswathama’s	raunchy	comments	often	led	to
fights.	 Their	 morning	 practice	 sessions	 were	 riotous,	 with	 Aswathama	 matching
Karna’s	 skill	 in	 archery	 and	 threatening	 to	 steal	 the	 bride.	 Jayadratha	 wanted	 to
say	 something	 to	 Suyodhana	 about	 Subhadra,	 but	 the	 thought	 better	 of	 it.	 They
were	all	having	such	a	good	time	that	he	did	not	want	to	spoil	the	Prince’s	fun.

When	 they	 entered	 Kampilya,	 Panchala’s	 capital	 city	 was	 in	 a	 festive	 mood.
Marigolds	 hung	 from	 ropes	 tied	 across	 the	 streets	 and	 the	 buildings	 had	 been
freshly	painted.	The	streets	shone	after	being	scrupulously	washed	and	thousands
of	people	milled	about	in	festive	attire.	Hawkers,	peddlers	and	vendors	added	to
the	gaiety	with	their	cries,	while	street	magicians	and	snake	charmers	entertained
the	crowds.	The	gold-plated	chariots	of	various	Princes	sped	by,	and	the	rulers	of
various	kingdoms	paraded	majestically	atop	their	elephants.	Groups	of	 Brahmins
walked	about	singing	devotional	songs.	It	was	a	grand	event.
As	they	neared	the	palace,	a	long	procession	overtook	Suyodhana’s	group.	Sitting
majestically	in	his	howdah	was	a	noble-looking	old	man.	He	smiled	at	the	Crown
Prince	 when	 their	 eyes	 met.	 The	 Prince	 and	 his	 friends	 bowed	 respectfully.
Behind	 the	 elephant,	 a	 large,	 middle-aged,	 black	 man,	 rode	 a	 beautiful	 white
horse.	Holding	his	head	proudly,	he	looked	straight	ahead.	He	nodded	curtly	to	the
Crown	Prince	of	Hastinapura	and	resumed	his	stone	like	posture.
“Who	was	that?”	Karna	asked	Suyodhana.
“Jarasandha,	 King	 of	 Magadha.	 He	 is	 a	 great	 man	 and	 one	 of	 our	 best
administrators.	 Bhishma	 has	 a	 lot	 of	 respect	 for	 him.	 He	 often	 says	 that	 with
Balarama	 in	 the	 West,	 and	 Jarasandha	 in	 the	 East,	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 can
never	take	over	all	of	India	and	impose	Parashurama’s	agenda	on	the	country.	The
black	 man	 riding	 behind	 him	 is	 Hiranyadhanus,	 Commander-in-Chief	 of	 the
Magadha	 armies.	 He	 is	 a	 Nishada,	 and	 one	 of	 the	 finest	 generals	 in	 India.
Jarasandha	defied	all	caste	rules	in	elevating	him	to	such	an	important	post.	When
Parashurama	chided	him	for	the	gross	violation	of	caste	rules,	he	replied	that	he
ran	 his	 country	 on	 merit,	 not	 by	 outdated	 scriptures.	 Angered,	 Parashurama
ordered	Kalinga	to	mount	an	attack	on	Magadha,	but	 the	Nishada	general	 routed
the	Kalinga	army,	proving	Jarasandha’s	faith	in	him	to	have	been	right.”
Karna	looked	at	the	passing	procession	with	new	eyes.	He	was	not,	after	all,	the
first	 person	 to	 have	 broken	 the	 caste	 ranks.	 Someone	 had	 done	 it	 from	 an	 even
lowlier	 position.	 And	 Suyodhana	 had	 not	 been	 the	 first	 Prince	 to	 defy	 the	 strict
caste	rules.	But	the	mention	of	Parashurama	touched	a	painful	chord	in	the	Suta’s
heart.
“Hey,	do	you	know	the	Nishada	General	has	a	son	whom	he	left	behind	with	his
brother	 when	 he	 went	 off	 in	 pursuit	 of	 his	 ambitions?”	 Jayadratha	 asked	 his

friends.
“I	have	heard	so.	It	is	also	rumoured	that	he	is	the	same	boy	my	father	ordered	to
sacrifice	 his	 thumb	 for	 Arjuna’s	 sake.	 Ekalavya…	 yes,	 that	 was	 the	 name.	 Even
now	 I	 cannot	 get	 over	 the	 gross	 injustice	 my	 father	 did	 to	 that	 poor	 boy,”
Aswathama	said.
The	 others	 looked	 away	 embarrassed,	 not	 knowing	 how	 to	 react.	 When	 they
entered	 the	 huge	 hall	 where	 the	 event	 was	 to	 take	 place,	 they	 saw	 Balarama
talking	to	Jarasandha.	Suyodhana	went	towards	his	mentor	and	Guru	and	touched
his	feet.	One	by	one,	his	friends	 did	 the	 same.	 Balarama	 introduced	them	 to	 the
King	of	Magadha	and	his	faithful	Nishada	General.	Jarasandha	then	took	his	leave
and	went	to	his	allotted	seat	with	his	General.
“I	received	your	letter	Suyodhana,	and	I	am	happy	for	both	of	you.	We	shall	have
the	engagement	after	the	monsoon.	I	was	afraid	you	would	never	ask	and	leave	my
sister	broken	hearted.	I	shall	drop	in	 at	 Hastinapura	 and	 seek	 the	 permission	 of
His	Highness	Dhritarashtra,	and	the	Grand	Regent,	so	that	we	can	formally	settle
the	alliance,”	Balarama	said	to	an	ecstatic	Suyodhana,	while	Jayadratha	twitched
his	 fingers	 uneasily.	 “Ah,	King	 of	 Anga…	 I	 am	 proud	 of	 you,	 Karna.	 You	 have
proved	 that	 talent	 knows	 no	 barriers.”	 The	 Yadava	 leader	 clasped	 Karna	 by	 the
shoulders.
Karna	swallowed	the	lump	in	his	throat	and	smiled	at	the	man	who	had	inspired
him	 to	 surmount	 all	 odds.	 He	 looked	 around	 and	 saw	 a	 bejewelled	 Draupadi
seated	on	the	dais.	Their	eyes	met	and	his	heart	leapt	in	his	chest.	She	smiled	at
him	and	Karna	thought	he	would	collapse	and	die.	He	looked	away,	trying	to	listen
to	what	Balarama	was	saying	to	him.
“This	is	an	uncivilised	way	of	arranging	a	match.	It	insults	the	dignity	of	a	woman.
I	came	here	to	ensure	no	Yadava	Prince	participates.	Either	the	man	and	woman
fall	in	love	and	get	married	or	the	elders	arrange	a	suitable	match.”
Engrossed	 in	 Balarama’s	 tirade	 against	 the	 barbarian	 custom	 of	 the	 modern
swayamvara,	Karna	and	his	friends	did	not	see	Krishna	move	towards	Draupadi.
Shikandi	 and	 Prince	 Dhristadyumna	 were	 with	 him,	 as	 was	 the	 Chief	 Priest	 of
Panchala.	 Had	 they	 looked	 at	 the	 dais,	 they	 would	 have	 seen	 Krishna	 gently
chiding	 the	 Panchala	 Princess,	 and	 the	 dismay	 on	 her	 face.	 But	 they	 did	 not	 see

Krishna	pointing	to	Karna	and	saying	something.	Her	brother	too	whispered	in	her
ear.	Draupadi	turned	away,	trying	to	control	the	tears	brimming	in	her	eyes.	Then
Krishna	pointed	towards	a	group	of	Brahmins.	She	looked	up	to	see	five	tall	men
standing	 amongst	 them.	 Somehow,	 they	 looked	 like	 warriors	 rather	 than	 Priests.
One	amongst	them	stood	staring	at	her.	When	their	eyes	met,	he	looked	away,	as	if
ashamed.	 Before	 she	 could	 say	 anything,	 the	 bugle	 announcing	 the	 arrival	 of	 her
father	sounded	and	the	assembly	rose	as	Dhrupada,	King	of	Panchala,	walked	in
with	his	Queen.	The	murmuring	died	away	as	everyone	waited	for	him	to	speak.
“Honourable	 Kings	 and	 Princes	 of	 India,	 Panchala	 humbly	 acknowledges	 your
esteemed	 presence.	 From	 the	 moment	 a	 girl	 is	 born,	 her	 parents	 wait	 for	 this
auspicious	 day.	 Today,	 my	 precious	 daughter	 will	 find	 her	 life	 partner.	 All	 the
Princes	assembled	here	today	are	fine	warriors,	yet	there	is	no	limit	to	a	father’s
greed	when	it	comes	to	the	good	of	his	daughter.	I	want	only	the	very	best	to	win
her	hand,	by	mesmerising	us	with	his	skill.	My	Minister	will	explain	the	rules	of
the	contest.”	The	King	sat	down	with	a	happy	smile	and	the	assembly	of	nobles
resumed	their	seats.
Animated	 chatter	 broke	 out	 among	 the	 nobles	 and	 stopped	 only	 when	 the	 Prime
Minister	 of	 Panchala	 announced	 the	 rules.	 He	 drew	 their	 attention	 to	 a	 metallic
fish	 rotating	 on	 the	 ceiling	 at	 blazing	 speed.	 A	 huge	 copper	 vessel,	 filled	 to	 the
brim	 with	 water,	 was	 placed	 directly	 below	 it	 on	 the	 floor.	 A	 slightly	 wavy
reflection	 of	 the	 rotating	 fish	 could	 be	 seen	 in	 the	 water.	 Each	 contestant	 had	 to
pick	 up	 the	 bow	 placed	 over	 the	 vessel	 and	 string	 it.	 Then,	 looking	 only	 at	 the
reflection	of	the	fish,	he	had	to	shoot	the	metal	fish	in	the	eye.	Each	contestant	had
two	minutes	to	make	the	attempt.
The	task	seemed	ridiculously	simple	compared	to	the	rules	at	other	swayamvaras
they	had	attended.	One	Prince	related	how	he	had	fought	a	tiger	to	win	his	present
wife.	 Compared	 to	 that,	 this	 challenge	 seemed	 silly.	 Karna	 looked	 at	 the	 faces
around	him	and	smiled.	He	had	correctly	judged	the	difficulty	of	the	task.	His	eyes
locked	on	Draupadi,	his	heart	pounding.	Why	was	she	not	looking	at	him?	Karna
was	 desperate	 to	 catch	 a	 glimpse	 of	 those	 lovely	 eyes,	 but	 the	 Princess	 kept
staring	at	her	toes.
When	Balarama	rose	to	speak,	there	was	angry	murmuring	among	the	contestants.
“Your	 Highness,	 forgive	 me	 if	 I	 sound	 impudent.	 But	 I	 think	 your	 daughter
deserves	 better	 than	 this.	 She	 is	 not	 a	 prize	 horse	 to	 be	 auctioned.	 It	 is	 time	 we

stop	 this	 custom.	 In	 ancient	 times,	 the	 swayamvara	had	 no	 contest.	 The	 maiden
chose	 her	 husband	 from	 many	 suitors,	 by	 placing	 a	 garland	 upon	 him.	 Only	 the
woman’s	choice	mattered.	This	game	of	showmanship	is	disrespectful	towards	the
woman,	making	her	a	commodity	to	be	bartered,	sold,	won,	or	lost,	like	cows	and
sheep.	Let	the	Princess	Draupadi	chose	her	husband	and	let	there	be	no	unseemly
contest	for	her	hand.”
“Sir,	with	all	due	respect,	this	is	my	daughter’s	future.	What	is	wrong	with	a	father
wishing	 only	 the	 best	 warrior	 to	 wed	 his	 daughter?	 She	 is	 young	 and	 cannot	 be
expected	 to	 make	 a	 rational	 decision.	 She	 might	 just	 choose	 the	 most	 handsome
man,	as	young	girls	are	wont	to	do.	I	want	only	the	best	for	my	daughter	and	as	a
Kshatriya;	 I	 prefer	 her	 husband	 be	 a	 great	 warrior.”	 The	 Panchala	 King	 spoke
politely	to	Balarama,	but	the	Yadava	leader	did	not	miss	the	underlying	contempt
in	his	host’s	voice.
“Your	Highness,	she	is	like	a	daughter	to	me	too,	but	the	best	warrior	need	not	be
the	best	husband.	I	too,	am	concerned	for	her	future.	If	the	Princess	does	not	have
freedom	of	choice,	why	call	this	a	swayamvara?	But	I	will	not	waste	everyone’s
time.	Perhaps	I	am	old-fashioned	and	unable	to	keep	up	with	these	modern	trends.
But	as	the	leader	of	the	Yadavas,	I	can	speak	for	my	people.	We	are	against	this
custom	and	I	order	that	no	Yadava	take	part	in	this	contest.”	Balarama	sat	down,
his	face	carved	in	stone.	A	groan	rose	from	the	ranks	of	the	young	Yadavas.	Their
leader	was	becoming	crankier	by	the	day.
Karna	did	not	hear	half	his	mentor’s	words.	Suyodhana	said	something	to	him	but
that	too	went	over	the	Suta’s	head.	His	lips	had	gone	dry.	He	prayed	she	would
look	at	him	just	once	more.	When	the	gong	sounded,	marking	the	beginning	of	the
contest,	 he	 was	 startled	 and	 averted	 his	 gaze	 from	 her.	 His	 eyes	 met	 those	 of
Krishna.	He	smiled	at	the	Yadava	and	Krishna	smiled	back.	‘Perhaps	he	no	longer
hates	so	much,’	Karna	thought,	relieved	at	the	apparent	cordiality	of	his	old	foe.
The	 contest	 began	 in	 earnest.	 Lots	 were	 drawn	 and	 the	 first	 few	 Princes	 soon
found	 the	 task	 was	 not	 as	 easy	 as	 it	 looked.	 The	 bow	 was	 very	 heavy	 and	 if	 a
contestant	managed	to	lift	it,	ripples	disturbed	the	faint	reflection	in	the	water	and
they	 could	 no	 longer	 see	 their	 target.	 One	 by	 one,	 each	 one	 failed.	 There	 were
angry	murmurs	and	protests	that	the	time	stipulated	was	too	short.	As	the	day	wore
on,	there	were	many	sulky	faces.	A	few	were	able	to	lift	the	bow,	but	their	aim	left
them	 embarrassed.	 Jarasandha,	 King	 of	 Magadha,	 almost	 got	 it	 but	 his	 arrow

missed	the	fish’s	eye	by	a	fraction.	From	his	smile	it	was	evident	he	did	not	wish
to	win,	and	winked	at	Balarama	as	he	passed	him.
“You	 are	 old	 enough	 to	 be	 her	 father,	 Your	 Highness,”	 Balarama	 said	 to	 his	 old
friend	as	the	Magadha	King	returned	to	his	seat.
“I	am	here	merely	to	do	my	duty	by	my	kingdom,	not	to	win,”	said	the	King.
Karna’s	 turn	 came.	 He	 did	 not	 hear	 Aswathama	 wishing	 him	 good	 luck.	 He	 felt
Suyodhana’s	 hand	 on	 his	 shoulder.	 Like	 a	 man	 in	 trance,	 he	 walked	 towards	 the
bow.	‘One	glance	from	her,	oh	God,’	he	prayed.	But	Draupadi	sat	like	a	statue,	her
head	 bowed.	 The	 gong	 sounded	 again.	 The	 warrior	 in	 Karna	 pushed	 away	 the
lover.	 He	 took	 his	 time	 to	 walk	 around	 the	 bow,	 judging	 its	 weight	 by	 its
appearance.	Then	he	looked	at	the	revolving	fish.	Finally,	he	stood	at	an	angle	to
the	 bow	 and	 lifted	 it	 easily,	 without	 causing	 any	 ripples	 in	 the	 water.	 The
assembly	of	nobles	waited	anxiously	as	Karna	strung	the	bow	and	raised	it	above
his	 head.	 He	 picked	 up	 the	 arrow	 and	 drew	 the	 bowstring	 taut,	 his	 eyes	 never
leaving	the	reflection	of	the	target	in	the	water.
“I	will	not	marry	a	Suta.”	The	soft	whisper	came	from	Draupadi.	It	sounded	like	a
thunderclap	in	the	silent	and	expectant	hall.
There	was	a	stunned	silence.	But	Karna	did	not	hear.	Every	cell	of	his	being	was
concentrated	on	the	target.	He	shot	the	arrow	and	hit	the	eye	of	the	revolving	fish
with	 a	 clang.	 A	 roar	 of	 applause	 shattered	 the	 silence	 as	 Karna	 looked
triumphantly	 at	 Draupadi.	 But	 she	 did	 not	 raise	 her	 head.	 Prince	 Dhristadyumna
went	 up	 to	 Karna	 and	 asked	 him	 to	 return	 to	 his	 seat.	 Karna	 looked	 perplexed.
Had	he	not	hit	the	target	after	all?
A	Priest	shouted	angrily,	“Did	not	you	hear,	Suta?	The	Princess	does	not	wish	to
marry	a	low	caste.	Go	back	to	driving	your	chariot.”
Karna	looked	at	Draupadi’s	bent	head,	rage	and	shame	burning	in	his	brown	eyes.
‘How	 dare	 you	 insult	 me	 like	 this?	 I	 was	 invited	 to	 come	 and	 I	 won	 fairly,’	 he
wanted	to	shout.	Then	he	saw	her	lift	her	head	and	gaze	at	him.	He	saw	a	sadness
that	was	even	deeper	than	his	own,	reflected	in	those	dark	eyes.	Near	her,	Krishna
stood	wearing	his	characteristic	smile.	Karna	knew	he	had	lost.

Suyodhana	and	Aswathama	rushed	into	the	middle	of	the	assembly,	their	swords
drawn.	 Jayadratha	 and	 Sushasana	 followed	 close	 behind.	 Shikandi	 and
Dhristadyumna	 ran	 to	 stop	 them	 and	 soon	 many	 of	 the	 Princes	 present	 were
running	into	the	middle	and	taking	sides	randomly.	It	became	a	bloody	riot,	with
the	 elders	 screaming	 at	 the	 hot-blooded	 young	 men	 to	 stay	 calm.	 Finally,
Balarama,	Jarasandha	and	General	Hiranyadhanus,	boldly	ran	into	the	middle	and
prised	apart	the	fighting	warriors.	When	the	combatants	had	calmed	down,	there
were	many	people	writhing	on	the	floor	with	grave	injuries	and	a	few	who	were
dead.	No	one	saw	a	dejected	Karna	leave	the	assembly.
Karna’s	world	had	come	crashing	down.	He	jumped	into	his	chariot,	whipping	the
horses.	The	chariot	rushed	through	the	busy	streets	of	Kampilya	and	people	moved
aside	in	fear.	The	son	of	the	charioteer	sat	grim	faced,	anger	and	hate	welling	up
in	 his	 heart.	 ‘Nothing	 but	 caste	 matters	 here,’	 he	 thought	 bitterly.	 ‘What	 have	 I
done	to	deserve	this?’	As	he	sped	towards	Hastinapura,	Karna	vented	his	anger	on
the	 poor	 horses.	 He	 drove	 dangerously	 fast	 along	 the	 highway,	 when	 suddenly	 a
beggar	and	a	dog	appeared	on	the	road.	Karna	cursed	and	pulled	urgently	at	the
reins.	 The	 chariot	 stopped	 perilously	 close	 to	 the	 beggar	 and	 his	 dog.	 With	 one
look	at	the	beggar	the	curse	on	Karna’s	lips	died.	It	was	the	same	beggar	who	had
saved	his	life.
“Swami,	do	you	remember	me?	You	fed	me	when	I	was	small.	Jara...	I	am	Jara....
Do	 you	 remember?	 See	 how	 my	 Krishna	 has	 blessed	 you.	 You	 are	 a	 King	 now.
The	good	Prince	Suyodhana	is	your	friend.	I	saw	you	riding	in	his	chariot	the	day
of	the	graduation,	when	we	last	met.	Do	you	remember,	Swami?”
Karna	looked	at	Jara’s	happy	face	and	the	dog’s	wagging	tail.	All	his	anger	melted
away.	The	beggar	was	not	speaking	of	his	own	role	in	saving	his	life;	he	was	not
talking	about	the	beatings	he	had	received	while	Karna,	Parashurama’s	disciple,
the	 great	 Dharmaveera,	 had	 been	 hiding	 like	 a	 coward	 in	 a	 tree.	 Instead,	 the
beggar	 was	 grateful	 for	 the	 cup	 of	 rice	 Karna’s	 mother	 had	 served	 him	 years
before
“Why	are	you	sad,	Swami?	You	have	become	a	King.	But	still	you	are	so	sad?”
“Jara,	take	me	somewhere	where	I	can	find	your	God.	I	have	lost	the	meaning	of
my	life.”	Karna	reached	out	his	hand	to	the	beggar.

“Come	with	me,”	Jara	said,	and	started	running	along	the	road.
Karna	shouted	at	him	to	get	into	the	chariot,	but	Jara	kept	running,	his	dog	in	tow.
Karna	 followed	 in	 the	 chariot	 and	 soon	 found	 himself	 in	 a	 colony	 of	 lepers	 and
sick	 people.	 Everything	 became	 clear	 to	 him.	 Balarama’s	 words	 about	 what	 he
owed	each	blade	of	grass	in	this	country,	came	rushing	back	to	him.	He	saw	Jara
giving	away	the	little	he	had	earned	that	day	to	people	still	more	unfortunate	than
himself.	Karna	was	stricken	with	guilt.	‘I	am	a	mere	Suta	yet	my	friend	made	me	a
King.	 The	 best	 Gurus	 trained	 me.	 I	 have	 everything,	 yet	 I	 am	 bitter	 because	 a
woman,	who	cannot	think	beyond	caste,	did	not	want	me.’
Impulsively,	Karna	began	giving	away	his	ornaments.	Then	he	stripped	his	chariot
of	its	golden	stripes	and	gave	them	away	as	well.	Soon	he	was	mobbed	by	people
asking	for	more	and	more.	He	gave	away	almost	everything	he	had	with	him.	Jara
sat	in	a	corner	and	sang	about	the	love	of	Krishna.	As	dusk	fell,	more	and	more
people	arrived	to	accept	the	Suta’s	charity.	His	friends	arrived,	and	Aswathama
tried	 to	 drag	 Karna	 away,	 telling	 him	 to	 fight	 and	 regain	 Draupadi.	 But	 Karna
refused	 to	 move.	 Suyodhana	 understood	 his	 friend.	 Silencing	 Aswathama	 and
gesturing	for	him	to	follow,	he	quietly	went	to	join	Karna.
When	 Karna	 was	 left	 with	 only	 his	 armour,	 earrings,	 and	 the	 clothes	 he	 wore,
Suyodhana	 silently	 began	 unclasping	 his	 priceless	 necklaces	 and	 handing	 them
over	to	his	friend,	who	promptly	gave	them	away.	Jara	was	singing	about	Radha’s
lost	love,	Krishna.	Despite	himself,	the	bitter	echo	of	Draupadi’s	words,	‘I	will
not	marry	a	Suta’,	refused	to	leave	Karna’s	wounded	heart.
***

When	the	guards	had	removed	the	dead	and	injured,	Balarama	stood	up	to	address
the	 Panchala	 King.	 “Your	 Highness,	 such	 a	 fracas	 is	 to	 be	 deplored.	 You	 have
insulted	the	King	of	Anga,	a	valiant	young	man,	without	cause.	If	you	did	not	wish
him	to	marry	your	daughter	because	of	his	caste,	you	should	not	have	invited	him
at	all.”
Krishna	 stood	 up	 and	 said	 with	 a	 soothing	 smile,	 “Brother,	 the	 King	 has	 not
spoken	 a	 word	 against	 Karna	 or	 his	 caste.	 The	 Princess	 herself	 expressed	 her
unwillingness	to	marry	a	person	of	low	caste.	A	few	minutes	ago,	you	were	telling
us	that	women	should	have	the	freedom	to	choose	their	husbands.	Why	should	we

then	deny	the	Panchala	Princess	that	freedom?”
Balarama	 glared	 at	 his	 brother	 in	 fury.	 He	 knew	 Krishna	 had	 tied	 him	 in	 knots
using	his	own	words.	How	clever!
Jarasandha	 touched	 his	 friend’s	 shoulder	 to	 pacify	 him,	 whispering	 into	 his	 ear,
“Leave	it,	Balarama”.	The	Yadava	looked	into	his	friend’s	eyes	for	a	moment	and
then	 shook	 his	 head	 sadly.	 Jarasandha	squeezed	 his	 shoulder,	 forcing	 him	 to	 sit
down.	Krishna	smiled	at	Dhristadyumna.
All	the	Princes	present	had	tried	their	luck,	but	there	was	no	winner.	As	the	day
wore	 on	 without	 any	 conclusion,	 the	 King	 of	 Panchala	 grew	 more	 and	 more
anxious.	On	the	advice	of	Krishna,	Draupadi	had	rejected	the	only	archer	to	have
won	her	fairly,	because	of	his	caste,	and	now,	none	of	the	Kshatriyas	was	able	to
even	lift	the	bow,	let	alone	shoot	the	target.	The	Panchala	King	looked	pleadingly
at	Krishna,	who	smiled,	gesturing	for	him	to	stay	calm.	Finally,	when	there	was	no
Prince	left,	a	tall	and	muscular	Brahmin	stepped	forward	and	bowed	to	the	King.
There	 was	 a	 smattering	 of	 applause	 from	 the	 ranks	 of	 the	 Priests,	 but	 everyone
else	 looked	 at	 the	 young	 Brahmin	 indifferently.	 The	 dejected	 King	 nodded	 his
approval	for	the	young	Brahmin	to	try	his	luck.	The	Brahmin	looked	at	Krishna	for
reassurance	and	Krishna	put	his	clenched	fist	to	his	heart	and	nodded	his	head.
The	Brahmin	went	up	to	the	bow	and	studied	it.	Mimicking	the	Suta	who	had	won
the	 competition	 a	 few	 hours	 ago,	 he	 lifted	 it	 gracefully.	 The	 murmurs	 in	 the
assembly	suddenly	died	away.	A	few	people	stood	up	to	get	a	better	look.	The	air
was	tense	with	anticipation.	Would	this	Brahmin	win	the	contest	when	all	the	great
Princes	 of	 India	 had	 failed?	 The	 drummer,	 who	 counted	 out	 the	 seconds	 with	 a
rhythmic	beat	of	his	drum,	reached	the	last	three	beats.	The	spectators	sat	frozen
with	 tension.	 The	 Brahmin	 stood,	 every	 inch	 of	 his	 body	 alert,	 his	 mind	 seeing
only	 the	 target.	 A	 fraction	 of	 a	 second	 before	 the	 last	 drumbeat,	 the	 arrow	 flew
towards	the	revolving	fish.	It	hit	the	target	precisely	as	the	timekeeper	struck	his
last	beat.	The	assembly	was	shocked.	The	Brahmin	had	done	the	impossible.
Krishna	rushed	into	the	middle	and	hugged	the	winner.	He	turned	to	the	King	and
announced	proudly,	“Behold	Arjuna,	Pandava	Prince,	and	the	only	man	worthy	of
being	Draupadi’s	husband.”
There	was	a	stunned	silence	at	the	announcement.	The	Pandavas	were	supposed	to

have	perished	in	the	fire	at	Varanavata.	One	by	one,	Arjuna’s	brothers	embraced
him	and	then	Krishna.	They	stood	together	as	Krishna	addressed	the	shocked	and
silent	crowd.
“As	 you	 see,	 the	 Pandavas	 did	 not	 perish	 in	 the	 fire	 set	 by	 the	 malicious
Duryodhana	 and	 his	 companions.	 They	 escaped	 unscathed	 since	 they	 are	 no
ordinary	mortals	but	of	divine	origin.	Here	is	Yudhishtra,	the	epitome	of	dharma
and	the	son	of	the	Lord	of	Death.	Here	is	Bhima;	he	is	none	other	than	the	son	of
God	Vayu,	Lord	of	the	Winds.	Arjuna	is	the	son	of	Lord	Indra,	King	of	the	Gods.
And	Nakula	and	Sahadeva,	are	the	sons	of	the	divine	Aswhini	brothers.”	Krishna
paused	to	gauge	the	reaction	of	the	assembly.	He	avoided	looking	at	his	brother.
He	 knew	 Balarama	 loved	 him	 irrespective	 of	 their	 differences	 of	 opinion	 and
power	struggles.	The	Yadava	leader	was	naïve	and	soft	of	heart.	Krishna	knew	he
had	 all	 the	 time	 in	 the	 world	 to	 pacify	 him	 later.	 But	 the	 derisive	 smile	 on
Jarasandha’s	 lips	 and	 the	 piercing	 eyes	 of	 the	 Nishada	 General	 Hiranyadhanus
worried	 him.	 The	 others	 looked	 receptive	 enough	 and	 he	 was	 confident	 of	 his
oratory	and	powers	of	persuasion.
Krishna	 continued,	 “Do	 not	 be	 swayed	 by	 the	 arguments	 of	 evil	 men	 like	 the
Kauravas,	that	the	Pandavas	do	not	have	any	claim	to	Hastinapura	as	they	are	not
the	real	sons	of	Pandu.	The	Kauravas	claim	Pandu	was	impotent.	There	can	be	no
greater	untruth.	Pandu	 insulted	 a	 Brahmin	 in	 his	 youthful	 folly	 and	 the	 holy	 man
cursed	him	saying	he	would	die	if	he	attempted	physical	intimacy	with	a	woman.
That	 is	 the	 truth	 and	 every	 learned	 man	 in	 this	 country	 knows	 it.	 As	 per	 our
scriptures,	with	the	husband’s	permission,	wives	can	have	sons	by	any	Brahmin	or
God.	We	consider	such	women	chaste.	Learned	men	also	say	that	the	Brahmins	or
Gods,	 who	 thus	 bless	 these	 fortunate	 women	 with	 sons,	 do	 not	 have	 any
responsibility	or	claim	on	their	progeny.	The	husband	is	blessed	and	the	sons	born
of	such	divine	relationships	are	considered	his	progeny	alone.	Duryodhana	wishes
to	 propagate	 the	 scandal	 that	 the	 Pandavas	 are	 bastards.	 Greed	 for	 power	 has
made	 him	 blind	 to	 the	 truth	 that	 Yudhishtra	 is	 the	 rightful	 Crown	 Prince	 and	 not
him.	He	is	blinded	by	arrogance	and	does	not	respect	dharma.
“My	 brothers	 and	 sisters,	 dharma	is	 withering	 under	 the	 onslaught	 of	 such	 evil
men.	Duryodhana	has	made	a	Suta	the	King	of	Anga.	We	have	to	nip	such	actions
in	 the	 bud,	 for	 such	 naked	 transgression	 of	 our	 traditions	 will	 only	 lead	 to	 the
destruction	of	our	great	civilization.	That	son	of	the	charioteer	got	lucky	with	his
shot	 and	 hit	 the	 target.	 I	 was	 tense	 for	 a	 moment	 but	 am	 happy	 that	 better	 sense

prevailed	and	Draupadi	put	him	in	his	place.	I	applaud	the	courage	she	has	shown
in	not	letting	her	heart	win	over	her	head.	It	is	easy	to	be	impressed	by	Karna.	He
is	 handsome	 and	 arguably	 has	 some	 skill	 with	 the	 bow.	 Know	 that	 the	 little
knowledge	he	has,	was	gained	by	cheating	the	great	Guru	Parashurama.	Know	that
the	person	who	looks	so	heroic	is	nothing	but	a	low	class	imposter,	who	lied	to	a
great	man.	The	Guru	loved	this	pretender	like	his	own	son,	thinking	him	to	be	a
Brahmin.	 When	 he	 learned	 the	 truth,	 he	 lost	 consciousness	 and	 is	 even	 now
struggling	 for	 life.	 The	 powerful	 Kings	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 are	 on	 the
lookout	for	this	charlatan.”
Krishna	paused,	happy	to	have	destroyed	any	lingering	sympathy	towards	the	Suta.
Before	 Jarasandha	 or	 Balarama	 could	 say	 anything	 to	 the	 contrary,	 he	 moved	 to
where	 the	 Panchala	 Princess	 sat	 with	 her	 eyes	 cast	 down,	 all	 youthful	 gaiety
erased	 from	 her	 face.	 “Princess	 Draupadi,	 we	 are	 proud	 of	 you.	 A	 better	 man
could	not	have	gained	your	hand.	May	you	always	be	happy	and	have	a	hundred
sons.”
Jarasandha	looked	at	the	smiling	Krishna	and	chuckled.	He	said	to	Balarama	in	a
low	voice,	“I	cannot	stand	this	farce	any	longer	and	am	now	leaving.”	He	clasped
his	 friend’s	 hands	 and	 held	 them	 close	 to	 his	 heart.	 Then	 he	 walked	 out	 of	 the
assembly	with	his	faithful	General	in	tow.	 Balarama	 stood	 up	and	 followed	him
out.	 As	 the	 venerable	 King	 of	 Magadha	 was	 mounting	 his	 elephant,	 Balarama
caught	 up	 with	 him.	 The	 elderly	 King	 said,	 “This	 country	 is	 going	 to	 the	 dogs
Balarama,	and	I	truly	pity	your	clever	brother.”
They	could	hear	the	chanting	of	the	Priests	from	the	sabha	as	Draupadi	was	duly
married	to	Arjuna,	according	to	traditional	rites	and	rituals.
“His	views	are	conservative	and	he	thinks	people	have	deviated	from	the	path	of
dharma.	He	has	taken	upon	himself	the	task	of	saving	the	world	from	people	who
think	 differently.	 That	 is	 all.	 He	 says	 he	 has	 come	 to	 earth	 to	 restore	 dharma,”
Balarama	said	to	the	older	man,	unwilling	to	let	him	leave	with	a	poor	opinion	of
his	brother.
“I	hope	he	will	not	become	dangerous	and	is	just	a	closet	fanatic,	as	you	want	me
to	believe.	But	I	fear	his	passion	will	divide	people	into	two	opposing	groups.	If
he	 does	 not	 acquire	 the	 wisdom	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	 like	 absolute	 dharma,	 be
assured	there	will	be	a	terrible	war	and	the	whole	of	India	will	be	sucked	into	the

vortex.	 In	 such	 a	 conflict,	 there	 will	 be	 no	 winners	 except	 a	 handful	 of	 Priests,
who	will	survive	and	flourish,”	Jarasandha	said	sadly,	suppressing	the	urge	to	be
more	harsh	on	Krishna,	in	the	face	of	Balarama’s	obvious	love	for	his	charming
brother.
“I	 will	 try	 to	 make	 Krishna	 understand.	 But	 as	 you	 say,	 times	 are	 unsettled	 and
there	are	many	people	willing	to	believe	that	you	are	in	fact	one	of	the	evil	Kings
of	India.	Be	careful	of	misguided	young	men	like	the	Nagas,	who	would	be	happy
to	endanger	you,”	Balarama	told	his	friend,	eyeing	the	haughty	Nishada	General.
“Balarama,	I	have	not	lived	my	seventy	years	as	a	coward	and	I	am	sure	it	is	not
Takshaka	 who	 wants	 to	 finish	 me.	 Do	 not	 worry.	 As	 long	 as	 I	 have	 faithful	 men
like	General	Hiranyadhanus	here,	I	fear	neither	the	Nagas	nor	the	netherworld,	or
avatars	who	walk	this	poor	earth	for	our	salvation.	Farewell	Balarama,	do	come
to	visit	us	sometime	soon.”	With	these	words,	the	King	of	Magadha	gave	the	order
to	his	mahout	and	the	elephant	lumbered	forward.	General	Hiranyadhanus	bowed
to	Balarama.	The	Yadava	leader	bowed	back	with	equal	deference.
With	a	man	like	the	Nishada	General	as	his	aide,	Jarasandha	had	nothing	to	fear,
thought	 Balarama,	 as	 he	 watched	 the	 entourage	 leaving	 Panchala.	 There	 was	 a
time	when	Jarasandha	had	been	Balarama’s	greatest	enemy.
Soon	after	Krishna	and	Balarama	had	assassinated	their	uncle	Kamsa,	then	King
of	 Mathura,	 Jarasandha,	 his	 brother-in-law,	 had	 laid	 siege	 to	 the	 city,	 bent	 on
revenge.	Those	had	been	difficult	days.	Balarama	had	been	young	and	impulsive.
Jarasandha	 and	 his	 Nishada	 General	 had	 attacked	 Mathura	 and	 ransacked	 the
capital	seventeen	times.	Krishna	wished	to	finish	off	Jarasandha	somehow,	and	the
chance	came	as	an	invitation	to	peace	talks	at	Pataliputra,	the	capital	of	Magadha.
Krishna	 planned	 to	 assassinate	 the	 usurper	 during	 their	 visit,	 and	 included
Balarama	 in	 the	 conspiracy.	 However,	 what	 he	 saw	 at	 Magadha	 changed
Balarama’s	perspective	and	his	life.	He	arrived	in	Pataliputra	with	his	mind	filled
with	 hatred,	 and	 came	 away	 with	 immense	 respect	 for	 Jarasandha.	 He	 vetoed
Krishna’s	 plan,	 leaving	 his	 brother	 furious,	 and	 decided	 to	 move	 the	 Yadava
people	 to	 the	 West	 coast	 of	 India,	 to	 build	 a	 dream	 city	 –	 Dwaraka.	 Jarasandha
became	a	dear	friend.
***

Soon,	a	delirious	crowd	carried	the	newlyweds	seated	in	a	palanquin,	to	the	home
of	the	Pandavas.	They	swarmed	round	the	couple	with	loud	celebrations	and	wild
dancing.	 Balarama	 saw	 the	 sadness	 in	 Draupadi’s	 eyes.	 ‘Daughter,	 you	 do	 not
know	what	you	have	missed	by	rejecting	Karna	because	of	his	caste.	May	Arjuna
keep	you	happy,’	he	prayed	as	he	watched	the	palanquin	moving	away	quickly.	He
did	 not	 know	 then	 that	 Kunti	 would	 take	 a	 momentous	 decision	 when	 the	 bridal
procession	reached	her	door.	It	would	alter	the	course	of	history	forever.

22	MARRIAGE
as	 the	 bridal	 procession	 reached	 the
Pandavas’	humble	hut.	The	dwelling	was	small	and	neat,	set	in	a	sylvan	hermitage
where	 similar	 huts	 were	 inhabited	 by	 Brahmins	 and	 holy	 men.	 The	 Pandava
brothers	patiently	waited	for	their	mother	to	open	the	door	and	welcome	them	in.
A	 woman’s	 instinct	 made	 Draupadi	 uneasy	 as	 she	 stood,	 shaking	 a	 little	 with
nervousness.	Arjuna’s	four	brothers	stood	behind	her.	She	could	feel	the	heat	from
their	eyes	on	her	back	as	well	as	their	jealousy	towards	their	successful	brother.
KUNTI	 STOOD	 SHOCKED	 INTO	 IMMOBILITY	

“Mother,	Arjuna	has	brought	you	a	present,”	Yudhishtra	called	out.
Draupadi	could	see	two	eyes	boring	into	her	through	the	crack	in	the	door.	Finally,
Kunti	spoke	from	the	darkness	within.	“Whatever	you	have	brought,	Arjuna,	share
it	with	your	brothers.”
Had	 she	 heard	 correctly?	 ‘Share	 it	 with	 your	 brothers!	 It?’	 Draupadi’s	 quick
temper	flared	at	her	mother-in-law’s	instruction	to	her	son.	Each	of	Kunti’s	words
was	 like	 a	 needle	 piercing	 her	 soul.	 In	 the	 years	 to	 follow,	 she	 would	 often
remember	the	chill	of	those	words	and	recall	the	lust	in	the	eyes	of	the	Pandavas
as	 she	 stood	 trembling;	 and	 her	 warrior-husband’s	 helplessness	 –	 that	 supreme
archer	who	had	won	her.
“Is	that	the	right	thing	to	do,	mother?”	asked	Arjuna,	sounding	like	a	peeved	child
who	had	lost	his	favourite	toy	to	his	siblings.
Draupadi	burned	with	indignation.	They	were	discussing	her	yet	she	had	no	voice
in	deciding	her	own	future.	She	was	just	‘it’,	a	thing	without	heart	and	feelings;	to
be	bartered,	shared,	fought	over,	and	pawned	when	its	use	was	over.	But	she	held
back	 her	 tears,	 remembering	 she	 was	 first	 of	 all	 a	 Princess	 of	 Panchala	 and	 the
daughter	of	a	King.
“Krishna,”	Kunti	opened	the	door	and	 addressed	their	guest.	“Explain	to	Arjuna
what	 karma	 and	 dharma	are.	 Why	 is	 he	 angry?	 Does	 he	 not	 know	 they	 must	 all
stand	together	to	defeat	Duryodhana?	I	do	not	wish	them	to	fight	over	this	girl.	She

should	be	proud	that	each	of	my	five	incomparable	sons	will	share	her.	I	too,	have
done	 that	 in	 my	 time,	 as	 did	 my	 husband’s	 second	 wife,	 Madri.	 That	 is	 how	 all
five	of	them	were	born.”
“Am	I	a	prostitute	to	share	the	bed	of	all	your	sons?”	Draupadi	exploded	in	rage,
no	 longer	 able	 to	 remain	 silent	 in	 the	 face	 of	 such	 humiliation.	 “Why	 are	 you
silent,	Arjuna?	You	won	me	and	I	am	your	wife.	Do	you	want	me	to	share	a	bed
with	your	brothers?	Why	do	you	remain	silent?	Are	you	not	a	Kshatriya?”
Krishna	 came	 forward.	 “Aunt,	 allow	 me	 to	 mediate.”	 He	 took	 Draupadi’s	 hand
and	led	her	apart.	Arjuna	followed	them.
Yudhishtra	placed	a	mat	on	the	floor,	sat	down,	and	closed	his	eyes,	at	peace	with
himself.	 Bhima	vanished	into	 the	kitchen	to	forage	for	food,	 and	the	twins	stood
gaping	 at	 Draupadi.	 Kunti	 looked	 at	 the	 serene	 face	 of	 her	 eldest	 son.	 She	 had
taken	 a	 gamble	 and	 hoped	 Krishna	 would	 be	 able	 to	 convince	 this	 spirited	 girl.
Gandhari’s	sons	were	strong	because	of	their	unity.	This	girl	was	so	beautiful	she
could	create	trouble	and	frustration	if	she	lived	in	this	house	with	five	young	men,
all	of	whom	secretly	coveted	her.
When	 Krishna	 came	 back,	 it	 looked	 like	 he	 had	 managed	 to	 sort	 things	 out.
Draupadi	 kept	 her	 eyes	 lowered	 and	 Kunti	 could	 not	 decide	 whether	 she	 was
petulant	 or	 merely	 shy.	 Anyhow,	 she	 looked	 resigned	 to	 her	 future,	 in	 the	 best
tradition	 of	 Indian	 wives.	 Arjuna	 looked	 away,	 not	 prepared	 to	 face	 his	 mother,
brothers,	or	wife.	Yudhishtra	came	out	of	his	meditation	when	Krishna	patted	his
shoulder.	 Addressing	 Kunti,	 Krishna	 said	 in	 the	 voice	 of	 reason,	 “She
understands.	 I	 have	 explained	 everything,	 including	 the	 scriptural	 authority	 for
this.	 She	 asked	 Arjuna	 whether	 he	 agreed,	 and	 Arjuna	 replied	 that	 he	 would
follow	whatever	I	decide.	So	I	have	told	him	what	is	right.	Everything	is	settled.
Yudhishtra	will	have	her	for	one	year,	then	Bhima	for	the	next	year.	Arjuna,	being
third,	will	have	her	for	the	third	year,	and	the	fourth	and	fifth	are	for	the	twins.	The
cycle	will	continue	in	the	same	way,	with	a	month	between	each	new	cycle,	and
Draupadi	will	be	the	wife	of	all	five	brothers.”
Yudhishtra	quickly	cast	down	his	eyes	to	hide	his	elation.	As	the	eldest,	he	would
be	 first.	 He	 then	 looked	 at	 his	 mother.	 “The	 power	 of	 meditation	 and	 prayer	 is
more	 powerful	 than	 skill	 with	 arms,	 mother.	 Arjuna	 won	 her,	 but	 he	 knows	 his
duty	–	that	whatever	we	win	has	to	be	shared.”	He	walked	over	to	Draupadi.	“Do

not	 worry	 anymore.	 The	 wedding	 rites	 will	 be	 performed	 immediately	 to	 marry
you	to	each	of	us.	You	are	ours	now	and	we	will	protect	you	until	death	claims	us
all.”
“But	 my	 husband	 is	 Arjuna,	 your	 own	 brother…”	 Draupadi	 turned	 imploringly
towards	Arjuna,	willing	him	to	speak.	But	Arjuna,	the	mighty	warrior,	would	 not
meet	her	eyes	and	turned	away,	his	heart	unaccountably	filled	with	shame.	But	was
he	not	following	dharma?
Draupadi	looked	at	her	mother-in-law.	“Mother,	I	hope	these	are	all	the	sons	you
have.”
“Why...	why	do	you	ask,	daughter?”	Kunti’s	voice	had	lost	all	its	usual	authority.
She	averted	her	gaze	from	the	young	Princess	standing	so	proudly	before	her.
“So	I	do	not	wake	one	day	to	find	myself	wife	to	half	a	dozen	men.	I	am	sure	there
are	enough	scriptural	authorities	to	prove	that	too,	would	be	my	dharma.”
Yudhishtra	did	not	wait	for	his	mother’s	answer.	Sahadeva	ran	to	fetch	the	Priests
who	 would	 conduct	 the	 marriages	 as	 per	 Vedic	 rituals.	 The	 others	 followed
Yudhishtra	 into	 the	 house.	 Only	 Arjuna	 remained	 standing	 outside.	 The	 closing
door	sounded	as	final	as	death.
***

Later,	as	Draupadi	lay	on	her	bed	like	deadwood,	she	did	not	think	about	Arjuna,
the	great	archer	who	had	won	her,	or	Yudhishtra,	lying	asleep	beside	her.	Her	eyes
were	filled	with	the	image	of	a	man	slipping	away	like	a	chastised	dog	from	her
father’s	splendid	Court.	Her	mind	and	body	felt	violated,	defeated	and	numb.	Her
own	 words,	 ‘I	 will	 not	 marry	 a	 Suta,’	 screamed	 back	 at	 her	 endlessly	 in	 the
deafening	silence.
***

Arjuna	sat	grim	and	silent,	looking	at	the	fireflies	dancing	around.	The	hermitage
was	 abuzz	 with	 activity	 as	 preparations	 were	 being	 made	 to	 feed	 a	 hundred
Brahmins	 to	 celebrate	 the	 Pandavas’	 marriages.	 Krishna	 came	 to	 sit	 beside	 his
friend.	He	took	out	his	flute	and	began	playing.	Soon	a	magical	world	 enveloped
them.	The	 mesmerising	 music	 caressed	 Arjuna’s	 bruised	 soul.	 A	 crescent	 moon

peeped	 from	 behind	 dark	 clouds	 and	 poured	 molten	 silver	 onto	 the	 still	 earth.
From	 somewhere	 in	 the	 shadows	 of	 the	 swaying	 trees,	 the	 sweet	 song	 of	 a
nightingale	accompanied	Krishna’s	enchanting	melody.	Arjuna	closed	his	eyes	and
lost	himself	in	the	music.
“There	is	somebody	waiting	for	you…	who	loves	you.	We	can	leave	for	Dwaraka
tonight.”	Krishna	said	softly	to	his	friend	as	the	music	faded	away,	dissolving	into
the	surrounding	mist.	Arjuna	slowly	came	out	of	his	trance	and	looked	at	Krishna,
his	eyebrows	lifted	in	a	question.	“Forget	Draupadi,	Arjuna.	You	married	her	for
political	reasons.	By	marrying	the	Panchala	Princess,	the	Pandavas	have	become
strong	enough	to	challenge	Duryodhana.	Now	it	is	time	for	love.	Come	with	me	to
Dwaraka.	I	have	a	much	more	beautiful	Princess	waiting	for	you.	Arjuna,	follow
me	and	you	can	steal	my	sister	Subhadra’s	heart.”
“Subhadra?	But	isn’t	she	betrothed	to	my	cousin	Suyodhana?	How	can	I	do	such	a
dishonourable	thing?”	Arjuna	asked,	confused.
“I	know	my	sister	better	than	anyone	else.	She	no	longer	loves	Duryodhana.	She
adores	 you.	 Remember	 the	 day	 Duryodhana	 insulted	 you	 by	 elevating	 the
charioteer’s	 son?	 Everybody’s	 eyes	 were	 on	 the	 upstart	 Karna,	 except	 for	 my
sister’s.	She	alone	felt	for	you.	Noble	Prince,	the	Suta	stole	your	thunder	that	day,
but	you	gained	something	more	precious	–	my	sister’s	heart.	Do	you	think	I	would
allow	her	to	marry	Duryodhana,	my	friend?”
“How	 can	 I	 do	 something	 so	 dishonourable?	 She	 is	 promised...”	 Arjuna	 paused
and	 looked	 at	 Krishna’s	 smiling	 face.	 Rage	 struck	 him	 with	 the	 force	 of	 a
thunderbolt.	To	hell	with	honour!	His	own	brother	had	stolen	his	bride	from	him	in
the	name	of	dharma.	If	Yudhishtra	could	do	that	to	him,	why	could	he	not	do	the
same	to	Duryodhana?	Arjuna	smiled	at	his	friend	and	clasped	his	hand.
***

The	chariot	carrying	Krishna	and	Arjuna	sped	towards	Dwaraka.	On	the	way,	they
stopped	 at	 a	 tavern	 to	 feed	 the	 horses	 and	 refresh	 themselves.	 A	 group	 of
travellers	were	sitting	around	a	fire.	The	two	friends	were	about	to	resume	their
journey	when	Arjuna	was	attracted	by	the	beauty	of	a	voice	singing	a	devotional
song.	He	moved	towards	the	fire	to	listen	while	Krishna	waited	impatiently	near
the	 chariot,	 his	 dark	 body	 merging	 with	 the	 shadows	 and	 making	 him	 almost

invisible.
A	 beggar	 with	 a	 horribly	 scarred	 face	 was	 dancing	 near	 the	 fire,	 his	 hands
rhythmically	clapping	to	his	song.	A	dog	lay	nearby,	its	tail	wagging	to	the	rhythm
of	 the	 song	 while	 it	 gazed	 at	 the	 star-sprayed	 sky	 with	 unseeing	 eyes.	 The	 man
sang	 rapturously	 about	 the	 love	 of	 God	 for	 all	 creation,	 and	 lamented	 Man’s
ingratitude	 for	 the	 blessing	 of	 life.	 Every	 moment	 was	 a	 cause	 for	 celebration,
every	breath	a	joyful	melody,	every	act	a	prayer,	and	every	thought	an	offering	at
Krishna’s	divine	feet.	Arjuna	did	not	know	why	the	poor	beggar’s	song	affected
him	so	much.	He	felt	he	was	doing	something	sinful	and	wrong.	A	group	of	young
men	 came	 out	 of	 the	 tavern	 with	 food	 and	 began	 serving	 everyone.	 Most	 of	 the
people	being	served	were	poor	Untouchables.	When	the	fire	flared	in	the	breeze,
Arjuna	suddenly	saw	one	of	the	faces	clearly,	and	was	shocked.	It	was	Karna!	He
also	recognised	the	man	playing	with	the	blind	dog.	It	was	Aswathama.	The	three
others	distributing	food	were	Suyodhana,	Sushasana	and	Jayadratha.
Arjuna	suddenly	felt	ashamed.	This	was	supposed	to	be	his	wedding	night.	How
could	 he	 explain	 his	 presence	 here?	 He	 hurried	 back	 to	 the	 chariot	 and	 seated
himself.	When	Krishna	whipped	the	horses,	Arjuna	said,	“That	beggar	was	singing
about	you.	Are	you	really	a	God	to	inspire	so	much	faith	in	such	poor	creatures?”
Krishna	smiled	as	the	chariot	lurched	forward,	carrying	away	the	Prince	who	kept
wondering	about	the	people	who	were	said	to	be	evil	but	who	were	spending	the
night	 with	 the	 poor;	 and	 his	 elder	 brother,	 who	 was	 the	 epitome	 of	 dharma,	 but
was	spending	the	night	with	the	woman	he	had	stolen.	Only	a	God	could	explain
such	 mysteries	 to	 him.	 The	 beggar’s	 song	 and	 the	 scene	 he	 had	 just	 witnessed
continued	to	haunt	Arjuna’s	disturbed	mind	as	they	travelled	through	the	night.
***

Suyodhana	impatiently	awaited	the	arrival	of	the	wedding	procession	bringing	his
bride	to	Hastinapura.	The	joy	in	his	face	gave	the	lie	to	his	studied	nonchalance.
The	palace	buzzed	with	activity	as	there	were	just	three	days	left	for	the	Crown
Prince’s	marriage	to	Princess	Subhadra	of	Dwaraka.	If	this	was	not	reason	enough
for	Hastinapura	to	celebrate,	the	Princess	Sushala’s	marriage	to	King	Jayadratha
of	Sindh	was	to	take	place	at	the	same	time	and	venue.
Almost	a	 year	 had	 passed	 since	 Arjuna	 had	 won	 Draupadi	 at	 the	 swayamvara.

The	news	that	all	the	Pandava	brothers	were	sharing	Arjuna’s	bride,	had	shocked
everyone.	 But	 gradually	 it	 became	 just	 a	 matter	 of	 ridicule.	 Six	 months	 before,
Balarama	 had	 arrived	 in	 Hastinapura	 to	 arrange	 his	 sister’s	 marriage	 to
Suyodhana.	 Krishna	 had	 not	 accompanied	 him.	 Suyodhana	 was	 disappointed
Subhadra	 had	 chosen	 not	 to	 come	 either.	 But	 he	 had	 been	 happy	 at	 the	 turn	 of
events.	Jayadratha	had	warned	him	that	her	feelings	had	warmed	towards	Arjuna,
but	 he	 refused	 to	 believe	 it.	 Nevertheless,	 he	 set	 his	 spies	 to	 check	 on	 the
whereabouts	of	Arjuna.	They	informed	him	that	Arjuna	had	been	missing	from	the
day	of	his	marriage,	and	that	Draupadi	was	serving	her	term	as	Yudhishtra’s	wife,
with	 Bhima	 eagerly	 counting	 the	 days	 for	 his	 turn	 as	 Draupadi’s	 husband.	 There
was	 a	 rumour	 that	 someone	 had	 seen	 Arjuna	 and	 Krishna	 travelling	 towards
Dwaraka	 in	 Krishna’s	 chariot.	 But	 Krishna	 had	 arrived	 at	 the	 Dwaraka	 palace
alone.	Nobody	had	seen	Arjuna.	That	eased	Suyodhana’s	mind.	Jayadratha	had	it
all	wrong.
Once	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 and	 King	 Dhritarashtra	 had	 given	 their	 approval	 to	 the
alliance	 with	 the	 Yadava	 Princess,	 Suyodhana	 had	 spoken	 to	 Balarama	 about
fixing	a	day	for	the	ceremony.	If	he	felt	any	unease	at	Jayadratha’s	warning	words,
he	buried	it	in	his	mind.	His	sister’s	alliance	with	one	of	his	closest	friends	added
to	 his	 joy.	 It	 had	 been	 Suyodhana’s	 idea	 to	 have	 both	 ceremonies	 performed
together.	 The	 wedding	 party	 from	 Sindh	 had	 already	 arrived,	 adding	 to	 the
festivities.	 It	 was	 difficult	 to	 walk	 around	 the	 palace	 without	 bumping	 into
someone.
Aswathama	 burst	 into	 Suyodhana’s	 room	 and	 grabbed	 him	 by	 the	 shoulders.
“Prince,	what	is	your	opinion	about	true	love?	Love	that	is	written	in	your	heart
blah	blah	blah…”
Suyodhana	 saw	 Karna’s	 embarrassed	 face	 behind	 the	 impish	 Brahmin	 and	 was
amused.	 “What	 has	 happened?	 Has	 Draupadi	 agreed	 to	 take	 Karna	 as	 her	 sixth
husband?”	Suyodhana	saw	 Karna’s	 face	 turn	 grim	 and	 immediately	 regretted	 his
insensitive	comment.	Poor	man!	He	had	not	forgotten	the	fiasco	at	Kampilya	the
previous	year.
Aswathama	laughed	and	said,	“Oh	no!	That	disaster	has	not	yet	happened,	though	I
am	 sure	 our	 friend	 here	 would	 be	 more	 than	 willing	 to	 be	 Draupadi’s	 sixth
husband.	 This	 is	 a	 different	 love	 story.	 The	 hero	 in	 this	 tale	 becomes	 a	 saint
following	 his	 love’s	 betrayal.	 Remember	 the	 day	 we	 stormed	 out	 of	 Dhrupada’s

palace	in	search	of	Karna,	after	Draupadi	refused	to	marry	him?	And	where	did
we	find	him?”
“She	insulted	me	in	front	of	everyone.	Living	with	five	men	is	better	than	marrying
me?	I	feel	nothing	but	disgust	for	her	now.	But	where	you	found	me	that	night	has
nothing	to	do	with	it.	I	was	genuinely	moved	by	the	plight	of	those	people.	I	am	no
different	from	them	after	all,”	said	Karna,	looking	away.
“Yes,	 yes,	 it	 was	 a	 spontaneous	 reaction.	 Of	 course	 we	 believe	 you,”	 agreed
Aswathama	 grinning	 and	 infuriating	 Karna	 further.	 But	 before	 Karna	 could
respond,	the	Brahmin	turned	towards	Suyodhana.	“Prince,	remember	the	scene	that
day?	 We	 found	 him	 among	 some	 beggars.	 He	 was	 spending	 money	 like	 a	 crazy
drunk,	buying	every	delicacy	available	and	feeding	them.	When	we	wanted	to	go
back	to	Dhrupada’s	palace	and	snatch	Draupadi	by	force,	he	refused	to	come!	You
remember	that	night.
That	 beggar	 with	 the	 dog	 kept	 singing	 the	 praises	 of	 Krishna.	 Except	 for	 his
armour	 and	 earrings,	 Karna	 gave	 away	 everything	 he	 had	 brought	 from	 Anga.
After	a	while	it	was	not	only	the	beggars	but	the	Brahmins	too,	who	queued	up	to
partake	of	Karna’s	generosity.	Hell,	he	forced	us	to	do	the	same	as	him.	I	was	as
poor	as	those	lepers	by	the	time	this	idiot	got	over	his	madness.	We	thought	then
that	it	was	just	an	odd	reaction	to	the	day’s	happenings.	But	this	madman	has	now
made	a	habit	of	it.”
“You	fools!	How	many	times	do	I	have	to	tell	you	that	my	actions	have	nothing	to
do	with	what	I	felt	for	Draupadi?	In	fact,	she	opened	my	eyes	that	day.	I	am	a	Suta.
I	was	pretending	to	be	a	Kshatriya.	If	not	for	the	generosity	of	Prince	Suyodhana,	I
would	have	remained	a	charioteer.	Her	rejection	reminded	me	of	who	I	am.	When
I	 came	 out	 of	 that	 assembly	 and	 saw	 the	 group	 of	 beggars,	 I	 felt	 I	 had	 been
ungrateful	 for	 the	 blessings	 I	 have	 received.	 If	 the	 Prince	 could	 risk	 his	 entire
kingdom	and	make	powerful	enemies	for	my	sake,	the	least	I	could	do	was	share
my	fortune	with	the	less	fortunate.	I	cannot	explain	what	I	feel	when	I	give	to	those
unfortunate	 people.”	 Karna	 looked	 away	 from	 his	 friends,	 afraid	 of	 his	 own
emotions.
“Aswathama,	he	is	trying	to	divert	us.	Tell	Suyodhana	what	you	came	to	tell	him
in	the	first	place.”	Sushasana	walked	in	and	sat	down	near	his	brother.

“Well,	Saint	Karna	has	found	a	new	love	and	is	waiting	for	your	wedding	to	be
over	before	announcing	his	own,”	Aswathama	said	with	a	wide	grin.
Suyodhana	 rushed	 to	 Karna	 and	 embraced	 him.	 “Tell	 me	 my	 friend,	 which
Princess	is	the	lucky	girl?”
Karna	 looked	 into	 his	 friend’s	 eyes.	 “She	 is	 not	 a	 Princess	 but	 a	 Suta	 called
Vrishali.	I	met	her	during	one	of	the	routine	trips	I	undertake	in	disguise	on	most
nights	I	am	in	Anga.	Fate	willed	we	meet.	She	lives	with	her	mother.	Her	father
died	in	service.	She	was	running	from	pillar	to	post	to	get	the	compensation	due	to
her.	 But	 you	 know	 what	 our	 bureaucracy	 is.	 I	 got	 her	 the	 money	 and	 punished	 a
few	corrupt	officials	in	the	process.
We	fell	in	love.	Even	now,	she	does	not	know	I	am	the	King	of	Anga.	She	thinks	I
am	a	horse	trader	with	some	influence	in	the	bureaucracy	because	of	my	business.
I	would	have	brought	her	to	meet	you,	but	she	would	be	bashful	about	coming	into
the	 presence	 of	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 of	 Hastinapura.	 Even	 though	 I	 have	 told	 her
many	times	that	you	are	my	best	friend,	she	refuses	to	believe	it	and	thinks	I	am
just	bragging	to	impress	her.”
Everyone	 burst	 into	 laughter.	 Aswathama	 pranced	 around	 the	 room	 crying
hoarsely,	“I	am	waiting	to	meet	her,	Karna.	Then	I	will	tell	her	some	stories…	like
Draupadi’s	Well	near	Kampilya…	and	the	feast	for	beggars,	hosted	by	the	King	of
Anga	 on	 the	 day	 she	 ditched	 him…	 as	 well	 as	 other	 revelries	 when	 he	 proved
himself	to	be	as	big	an	ass	as	he	looks…	ouch!”
Karna	had	shoved	the	Guru’s	son	to	the	floor.	Soon	the	others	pounced	on	the	poor
Brahmin	 and	 began	 pummelling	 him.	 There	 was	 a	 knock	 on	 the	 door	 and	 they
hurriedly	 got	 up,	 adjusting	 their	 clothing	 and	 hair	 to	 look	 as	 respectable	 as
possible.	 Vidhura	 entered.	 They	 all	 bowed	 in	 deference.	 The	 Prime	 Minister
looked	at	the	mess	the	room	was	in	and	ignored	the	sheepish	smiles	of	the	young
men.	 He	 turned	 to	 Suyodhana	 and	 said	 gravely	 that	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 wished	 to
see	him	at	once.
Suyodhana	 was	 immediately	 alert	 to	 the	 tone	 in	 Vidhura’s	 voice.	 Unless	 it	 was
important,	his	uncle	would	not	have	come	himself.	Suyodhana	grew	tense,	fearing
something	 had	 happened	 to	 someone	 he	 held	 dear.	 Vidhura	 did	 not	 utter	 another
word	till	they	reached	the	sabha.	Then	he	gave	Suyodhana’s	shoulder	a	squeeze

and	 went	 to	 take	 up	 his	 usual	 position	 near	 Bhishma.	 As	 Suyodhana’s	 eyes
adjusted	to	the	brightly	lit	room,	he	saw	his	father	and	mother	were	seated	next	to
the	Grand	Regent.	A	familiar	figure	stood	in	the	shadows,	but	he	could	not	quite
identify	him	until	the	man	moved	towards	him.	Balarama!	The	Yadava	leader	was
looking	so	distraught	that	it	took	Suyodhana	a	moment	to	recognize	him.	Balarama
had	aged	since	Suyodhana	had	last	seen	him.	The	Yadava	leader	fell	to	his	knees
and	would	have	touched	Suyodhana’s	feet	had	the	shocked	Prince	not	caught	him
by	his	shoulders.	“Sir,	what	are	you	doing?”	Suyodhana	pulled	up	the	older	man
and	then	bent	to	touch	his	Guru’s	feet.
“Forgive	me,	Prince.	I	have	failed	you.	I	have	brought	shame	upon	you	and	your
kingdom.	Punish	me	in	whichever	way	you	wish,”	the	Yadava	leader	said.
Suyodhana	 looked	 around	 in	 confusion.	 The	 silence	 was	 disturbed	 only	 by
Balarama’s	 attempts	 to	 catch	 his	 breath.	 A	 worm	 of	 doubt	 began	 gnawing	 at
Suyodhana’s	heart.
“Suyodhana.”	Bhishma’s	heavy	voice	 pierced	the	 uneasy	 silence	 and	 Suyodhana
almost	 knew	 what	 was	 coming.	 “Balarama	 has	 come	 here	 to	 announce	 the
marriage	 of	 his	 sister	 Subhadra	 with	 your	 cousin,	 Arjuna,	 and	 to	 ask	 for	 our
blessings.	 A	 few	 months	 ago,	 he	 came	 here	 to	 finalise	 an	 alliance	 between	 his
sister	and	you.	Knowing	your	wishes	in	the	matter,	we	agreed.	Now	it	seems	there
is	a	change	of	plan	on	the	Yadava	side.	His	sister	has	eloped	with	Arjuna,	from
the	palace	in	Dwaraka,	with	the	assistance	of	Krishna.”
“I	am	sorry,	Suyodhana…	I	did	not	know…”	Balarama	said,	the	lines	deepening
on	his	forehead.
The	world	came	crashing	down	upon	the	Crown	Prince.	Anger	rose	in	every	cell
of	 his	 body.	 He	 felt	 feverish.	 How	 could	 Arjuna,	 the	 bastard	 son	 of	 Kunti,	 dare
touch	his	girl?
“Suyodhana,	 there	 is	 no	 doubt	 this	 is	 a	 great	 insult	 to	 Hastinapura.	 We	 hold	 the
leadership	 of	 India,	 north	 of	 the	 Vindhyas,	 and	 a	 vassal	 kingdom	 has	 dared	 to
humiliate	 us.	 Not	 even	 our	 sworn	 enemies,	 the	 Southern	 Confederate,	 have
stooped	to	this	level.	I	certainly	never	expected	this	from	a	man	I	considered	my
own	 brother.	 Suyodhana,	 you	 have	 a	 choice	 now	 –	 to	 either	 ransack	 their	 puny
kingdom	and	teach	the	Yadavas	a	lesson	or	fight	Arjuna	to	win	back	your	woman.

I	wish	to	discuss	this	with	you.”	Bhishma’s	voice	trailed	away	when	Suyodhana
slowly	shook	his	head.
The	Crown	Prince	did	not	speak	for	some	time	but	kept	looking	at	his	mentor.	The
Yadava	leader	finally	averted	his	eyes,	unable	to	hold	the	Prince’s	gaze.	Finally
Suyodhana	said,	“Guru,	please	tell	me	who	drove	the	chariot	they	eloped	in.	Was
it	my	cousin	Arjuna	or…”
It	was	painful	for	Balarama	to	say	it.	He	loved	his	sister	like	a	father	and	she	had
repaid	his	love	by	insulting	him.	Swallowing	hard,	he	looked	into	the	eyes	of	his
disciple.	“Son,	it	was	not	your	cousin;	it	was	Subhadra	who	drove	the	chariot.”
Suyodhana	bowed	to	the	assembly	and	began	walking	away.
Bhishma	stood	up.	“Suyodhana!	Give	me	a	reply.	If	you	wish	to	fight	and	win	back
your	woman,	the	entire	army	of	Hastinapura	is	at	your	disposal.	Do	not	run	away
from	your	duty	as	a	Kshatriya.	Fight	for	your	woman,	your	kingdom,	your	honour.”
Suyodhana	 stopped	 and	 turned.	 “Pitamaha,	 It	 is	 evident	 Princess	 Subhadra	 has
chosen	 my	 cousin,	 Arjuna.	 I	 do	 not	 wish	 to	 fight	 her	 or	 use	 my	 kingdom’s
resources	to	settle	a	purely	personal	matter.”
“You	will	be	the	butt	of	ridicule	and	will	be	accused	of	cowardice,”	Bhishma	told
him	sternly,	not	mincing	his	words.
“I	 wish	 my	 cousin	 and	 Princess	 Subhadra	 happiness.	 Do	 not	 let	 my	 personal
issues	affect	the	policies	of	our	kingdom.	I	respect	my	Guru	Balarama	all	the	more
for	having	had	the	courage	to	come	here	and	tell	us	the	news	personally.	Let	not
the	 relations	 with	 Dwaraka	 suffer	 because	 of	 this	 small	 incident.”	 Suyodhana
walked	towards	the	door,	which	just	then	looked	like	a	million	leagues	away.
“Suyodhana!”	 Something	 in	 Bhishma’s	 voice	 made	 the	 Prince	 stop	 and	 turn.	 He
saw	the	glitter	of	tears	in	Bhishma’s	deep	eyes	and	waited	for	the	Grand	Regent	to
speak.	“Son,	I	am	proud	of	you.”
Suyodhana	 bowed	 again	 and	 left	 the	 hall	 as	 hurriedly	 as	 he	 could.	 He	 did	 not
forget	to	return	the	bows	of	the	guards	at	the	door	but	as	soon	as	he	had	moved
sufficiently	 away	 from	 the	 sabha	 and	 found	 a	 quiet	 and	 shadowed	 corner,	 he
pressed	his	face	to	the	cold	marble	of	the	wall.	The	emotions	he	had	kept	damned,

burst,	 and	 he	 wept	 shamelessly.	 He	 tried	 to	 curb	 the	 hatred	 he	 felt	 towards	 his
cousin	 but	 Subhadra’s	 lovely	 face	 jeered	 at	 him,	 mocking	 his	 naivety	 and
foolishness.	 He	 could	 almost	 hear	 Arjuna’s	 laughter	 at	 his	 plight.	 He	 knew	 the
Priests	 would	 enjoy	 his	 loss	 of	 face.	 He	 felt	 worthless	 and	 used.	 ‘Son	 of	 blind
parents,	I	too,	did	not	have	the	vision	to	see	Subhadra	was	making	a	mockery	of
my	love.	I	have	been	blind,’	he	thought,	pressing	his	burning	face	to	the	cold	stone.
An	 hour	 later,	 Aswathama	 found	 him	 in	 the	 same	 posture.	 Initially,	 the	 Prince
refused	to	tell	his	friend	 the	cause	of	his	distress.	Later,	when	he	finally	related
what	 had	 happened,	 and	 that	 Subhadra	 was	 already	 married	 to	 his	 cousin,	 his
friends	were	outraged.	It	took	Jayadratha	and	Karna’s	combined	strength	to	stop
Aswathama	rushing	out	in	search	of	Arjuna.	The	son	of	Drona	vowed	revenge	on
Arjuna	 for	 stealing	 the	 brides	 of	 two	 of	 his	 friends,	 first	 Draupadi,	 and	 now
Subhadra.	 Meanwhile,	 a	 drunken	 Sushasana	 slipped	 out	 to	 shower	 abuse	 on
Balarama.	 The	 Yadava	 leader	 bore	 his	 insults	 without	 lifting	 his	 head,	 until
someone	informed	the	Grand	Regent.	Bhishma	promptly	placed	Sushasana	under
house	 arrest	 until	 the	 morning	 of	 Princess	 Sushala’s	 wedding.	 It	 was	 left	 to
Vidhura	to	apologize	profusely	to	Balarama	on	behalf	of	Hastinapura.
***

Princess	Sushala’s	wedding	day	witnessed	curious	events.	Learned	men	said	that
such	things	did	not	augur	well	for	the	ancient	kingdom	or	Indian	civilization	as	a
whole.	‘The	Gods	have	shown	Duryodhana	his	place	by	making	him	the	fool	who
lost	his	bride	to	his	cousin,’	the	Priests	whispered	to	each	other.	Yet	the	arrogant
man	refused	to	learn.	What	angered	Dhaumya	most	was	the	audacity	of	the	Crown
Prince	in	conducting	the	marriage	of	two	Sutas	at	the	very	venue	he	himself	was
supposed	to	have	been	married.	The	Priests	under	Dhaumya	refused	to	solemnize
Karna	and	Vrishali’s	marriage,	but	Aswathama	and	Kripa	stepped	forward	to	do
so.	They	were	thus	married	beside	the	King	of	Sindh	and	Princess	Sushala.	The
renowned	 generosity	 of	 the	 Suta	 further	 angered	 Dhaumya,	 when	 he	 discovered
that	many	of	his	followers	had	secretly	blessed	the	couple	and	accepted	gifts	from
Karna.	He	could	not	understand	why	the	Gods	allowed	such	evil	men	to	flourish
in	this	holy	land.	Perhaps	it	was	the	advent	of	Kali,	the	age	of	adharma.	Dhaumya
assembled	 the	 Priests	 in	 his	 house	 and	 prayed	 sincerely	 for	 deliverance	 from
sinful	men	like	Suyodhana	and	his	friends.	Has	not	the	Lord	delivered	them	from
demons	like	Ravana	and	Mahabali	before?	What	was	important	was	keeping	faith
in	His	divine	wisdom,	Dhaumya	told	his	dejected	followers.	As	they	did	not	have

anything	other	than	the	words	of	the	Chief	Priest	to	cling	to,	the	holy	men	waited
for	the	Gods	to	take	care	of	Suyodhana	and	his	friends.
***

Ekalavya	 sat	 with	 his	 friend	 Aswasena,	 discussing	 the	 impending	 attack	 by
Takshaka	 on	 Hastinapura.	 Around	 them,	 the	 tall	 trees	 of	 the	 Khandivaprastha
forest	 stood	 like	 sentries.	 It	 was	 almost	 a	 year	 since	 Ekalavya	 had	 returned.	 He
had	been	welcomed	like	a	hero	by	Takshaka	and	given	command	of	a	platoon	of
guerrilla	fighters.	However,	the	old	King	Vasuki	kept	telling	Ekalavya	that	he	had
made	 a	 mistake	 in	 returning	 and	 that	 he	 should	 escape	 from	 the	 insane	 world
Takshaka	was	creating.
Except	for	the	singing	of	the	birds	and	the	occasional	rustling	of	dry	leaves	in	a
reluctant	 breeze,	 it	 was	 frighteningly	 silent.	 The	 sky	 was	 pregnant	 with	 rain	 and
the	 forest	 waited	 in	 anticipation	 of	 deliverance	 from	 the	 grip	 of	 the	 scorching
summer.	 Mayasura,	 a	 young	 Asura	 architect	 in	 his	 early	 twenties,	 sat	 with	 them,
quietly	 drawing	 pictures	 of	 fantastic	 palaces	 and	 temples	 in	 the	 sand.	 Mayasura
had	learned	his	trade	at	the	great	Asura	School	of	architecture.	The	school,	which
had	 flourished	 on	 the	 southeastern	 coast	 of	 India,	 had	 lost	 its	 charm	 after	 the
collapse	of	the	last	Asura	Emperor,	Ravana.	But	its	traditions	secretly	continued.
Many	of	the	students	only	built	clay	models	since	there	was	no	longer	a	demand
for	the	palaces	and	temples	the	Mayan	school	of	architecture	and	science	had	been
famous	for.	Theirs	was	a	dying	art.	The	practitioners	became	destitute,	pushed	into
the	 ranks	 of	 the	 Untouchables	 or	 Pariahs,	 as	 the	 Vishwakarma	 School	 gained
prominence.	Mayasura	was	a	victim	of	this	social	change	and	was	one	of	the	many
new	recruits	into	Takshaka’s	rebel	army.
The	secret	Naga	camp	in	the	Khandiva	forest	was	teeming	with	desperate	men	and
women,	who	lived	in	a	forgotten	India.	The	forests	covered	the	ancient	city	from
where	the	first	King	of	the	Indras	had	ruled	India,	thousands	of	years	before.	Later,
when	power	moved	into	the	hands	of	the	Brahmins,	ancient	ruling	clans	 like	the
Indras	went	into	decline.	The	incumbent	Indra	was	a	broken	old	man,	living	in	the
ruins	 of	 his	 crumbling	 palace	 deep	 in	 the	 jungle.	 It	 was	 rumoured	 that	 he	 had
fathered	 Arjuna,	 and	 had	 come	 back	 with	 a	 few	 copper	 coins	 for	 the	 service
rendered	 to	 Kunti.	 Bitter	 and	 mean,	 he	 had	 allied	 himself	 with	 the	 Nagas	 in	 the
hope	 that	 he	 would	 regain	 some	 of	 the	 lost	 prestige	 of	 his	 illustrious	 ancestors.
Takshaka	had	tactfully	taken	advantage	of	this	and	moved	his	army	into	the	dark

forests	ruled	by	Indra.	From	Khandiva,	it	was	only	a	couple	of	day’s	journey	to
Hastinapura.	The	jungle	was	ideal	for	Takshaka’s	kind	of	warfare.
Now,	Takshaka	and	Kaliya	walked	across	to	where	Ekalavya	sat.	The	young	man
stood	 up	 respectfully	 before	 the	 Supreme	 Leader	 of	 the	 Revolutionary	 Army.
Takshaka	 was	 displaying	 an	 increasing	 penchant	 for	 referring	 to	 himself	 by
pretentious	names.	This	mouthful	was	the	latest.	He	hugged	Ekalavya.	“I	knew	you
would	 bring	 us	 luck.	 We	 were	 desperate	 for	 a	powerful	ally	 and	 we	 now	 have
none	other	than	General	Hiranyadhanus’s	son	with	us.”
“Why	are	you	looking	so	confused,	Ekalavya?”	Kaliya	asked,	hiding	a	smile.	“The
great	General	of	Magadha	has	sent	the	Supreme	Leader	this	letter.	Read	it.”
Ekalavya	took	the	palm	leaf	from	Kaliya	with	trembling	hands.	The	revelation	that
his	 father	 was	 alive	 shocked	 him.	 He	 eagerly	 scanned	 the	 letter	 with	 the	 Royal
seal	 of	 Magadha.	 It	 was	 addressed	 simply	 to	 Shri	 Takshaka.	 General
Hiranyadhanus	 explicitly	 stated	 that	 Ekalavya	 was	 his	 long-lost	 son	 and	 wished
Takshaka	to	return	him	safely	to	Magadha.
Takshaka	 handed	 over	 another	 message	 to	 Ekalavya	 as	 well.	 It	 was	 a	 personal
letter	to	Ekalavya,	in	which	the	General	sought	 his	 son’s	 forgiveness	 for	 having
abandoned	him	as	a	child.	The	General	had	gone	in	search	of	his	fortune,	leaving
his	 infant	 son	 with	 his	 brother,	 following	 his	 wife’s	 demise.	 He	 had	 become	 an
exceptional	warrior.	Due	to	his	good	fortune,	he	had	met	a	King	who	thought	merit
was	 more	 important	 than	 caste,	 and	 placed	trust	in	him.	In	time,	he	 had	 risen	 to
become	 Commander-in-Chief	 of	 the	 Magadha	 army.	 He	 had	 tried	 to	 contact
Ekalavya	many	times	but	he	had	always	been	unsuccessful.	The	General	had	heard
about	the	horrible	fate	of	his	sister-in-law	and	his	five	nephews,	and	rumours	that
Ekalavya	was	alive	and	had	joined	Takshaka’s	forces.	He	wanted	to	meet	his	son
and	requested	him	to	come	to	Pataliputra,	the	capital	of	Magadha.
Ekalavya	 threw	 away	 the	 letter	 in	 disgust	 and	 anger.	 Where	 had	 this	 man	 been
when	 he	 had	 been	 struggling	 to	 keep	 body	 and	 soul	 together?	 Memories	 of	 his
poverty,	 the	 struggle	 to	 learn	 something	 worthwhile,	 the	 insults,	 the	 way	 his
people	were	treated,	and	the	death	of	his	aunt	and	cousins,	all	came	rushing	back.
He	turned	away,	retching	into	the	bushes.
“I	 have	 no	 father.	 To	 hell	 with	 this	 great	 man...”	 He	 turned	 and	 ran	 towards	 the

river.	The	Yamuna	seemed	to	beckon	the	Nishada	into	its	dark	depths.	The	sudden
shock	of	knowing	his	father	was	alive	was	too	much	for	his	bruised	mind	to	bear.
Takshaka	 followed	 and	 touched	 his	 shoulder,	but	Ekalavya	 did	 not	 respond.	 He
stood	 perilously	 close	 to	 the	 raging	 river,	 his	 hands	 covering	 his	 dark	 face.	 The
Naga	 leader	 saw	 it	 was	 best	 to	 leave	 him	 alone	 to	 find	 his	 own	 tortured	 peace.
Later,	Takshaka	and	Vasuki	both	tried	to	persuade	him	to	go	and	meet	his	father,
who	 was	 a	 powerful	 man.	 The	 revolution	 needed	 such	 friends.	 The	 attack	 on
Hastinapura	 was	 imminent.	 The	 General	 was	 a	 downtrodden	 Untouchable	 who
had	risen	to	great	heights	through	his	own	efforts.	Even	if	Ekalavya	did	not	need	a
father,	 the	 revolution	 needed	 the	 General.	 Takshaka	 used	 his	 persuasive	 powers
and	 even	 threatened	 Ekalavya	 with	 dire	 consequences	 if	 he	 acted	 against	 the
interests	 of	 the	 revolutionary	 army.	 But	 Ekalavya	 refused	 to	 budge.	 Takshaka
turned	away	angrily,	hinting	at	action	against	those	who	betrayed	the	revolutionary
cause.
Finally,	 the	 old	 man	 Vasuki	 succeeded	 in	 thawing	 Ekalavya’s	 frozen	 heart.	 His
anger	slowly	gave	way	to	curiosity	and	then	pride.	The	Nishada	decided	to	make
the	 fateful	 journey	 to	 meet	 his	 illustrious	 father.	 On	 the	 day	 Hastinapura	 was
celebrating	Karna’s	 marriage,	 Ekalavya	 started	 towards	 the	 Eastern	 kingdom	 of
Magadha,	 where	 a	 King	 who	 did	 not	 care	 for	 social	 rules	 reigned	 and	 an
Untouchable	 commanded	 her	 formidable	 army.	 Ekalavya	 was	 warming	 up	 to	 the
idea	 of	 meeting	 his	 father.	 The	 young	 architect	 Mayasura	 asked	 if	 he	 could
accompany	 Ekalavya	 on	 his	 journey.	 He	 wished	 to	 see	 the	 famed	 city	 of
Pataliputra.	 But	 Ekalavya	 only	 said,	 “Some	 other	 time,	 Mayan.”	 Ekalavya	 was
unsure	of	how	he	would	react	on	meeting	his	father	in	the	flesh	and	did	not	want
witnesses.
As	the	horse	carrying	the	dark	form	of	the	Nishada	vanished	into	the	horizon,	the
architect	sighed	in	disappointment.	He	had	only	learnt	architecture	theory	and	had
never	even	seen	a	major	city,	let	alone	designed	or	built	one.	As	an	Untouchable,
he	was	not	allowed	to	walk	near	any	of	the	palaces	or	temples.	He	yearned	to	see
great	 buildings,	 touch	 the	 stones	 and	 sculptures	 with	 his	 own	 hands,	 and	 walk
through	 the	 paved	 streets.	 In	 his	 heart	 of	 hearts,	 he	 nurtured	 a	 secret	 ambition,
which	was	far	more	than	a	mere	wish.	One	beautiful	thought	robbed	him	of	sleep;
one	dream	recurred	every	night;	and	one	prayer	rose	to	his	lips.	It	was	beautiful
because	 it	 was	 impossible.	 Mayasura,	 whose	 ancestors	 had	 designed	 the	 great
temples	 of	 India	 thousands	 of	 years	 ago,	 now	 fell	 to	 his	 knees	 and	 folded	 his

hands:	 “Oh	 Mahadeva,	 forgive	 my	 impudence	 in	 asking	 for	 something	 I	 do	 not
deserve.	 Oh	 compassionate	 one,	 grant	 me	 this	 one	 boon.	 Let	 me	 build	 the	 most
beautiful	city	in	the	world.	Let	my	city	live	forever	and...	be	the	heart	of	my	holy
motherland.”
In	 answer,	 the	 skies	 erupted	 angrily	 in	 loud	 claps	 of	 thunder.	 A	 bolt	 of	 lightning
struck	 a	 tree	 near	 the	 kneeling	 Mayasura	 and	 sent	 it	 up	 in	 flames.	 The	 young
architect	 looked	 fearfully	 at	 the	 dark	 sky,	 where	 clouds	 jostled	 each	 other	 and
clashed	 in	 flashes	 of	 lightning.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 the	 Gods	 in	 the	 high	 heavens	 were
angered	by	the	grandiose	dreams	of	this	puny	little	man.	Mayasura	ran	towards	his
hut,	his	hands	clutching	the	tiny	Shiva	linga	he	wore	on	a	string	round	his	neck,
and	closed	the	rickety	door	to	shut	out	the	fury	of	nature.	It	took	a	long	time	for	the
anger	of	the	heavens	to	subside.

23	MARCH	OF	CIVILIZATION
“WE	HAVE	NO	CHOICE,	VIDHURA.	Make	arrangements	to	hand	over	the	governance	of

Khandiva	to	the	Pandavas,”	Bhishma	said	to	his	Prime	Minister.
“Sir,	the	district	is	jungle	for	the	most	part.	The	river	is	unpredictable	there	and
often	floods	the	plains,	even	in	summer.	Moreover,	reports	indicate	rebels	under
Takshaka	are	camped	in	the	forest.”	Vidhura	was	uneasy	about	the	Grand	Regent’s
decision.
“Do	 you	 have	 a	 better	 suggestion,	 Vidhura?	 Kunti	 has	 come	 back	 to	 the	 palace
with	her	sons	and	daughter-in-law,	now	that	it	is	known	they	did	not	perish	in	the
fire	 at	 Varanavata.	 The	 caucus	 around	 her	is	busy	 spreading	 rumours	 that	 she	 is
being	discriminated	against	by	the	King.	I	dislike	the	cold	war	between	Gandhari
and	Kunti.	Moreover,	if	the	reports	about	Takshaka	being	in	Khandiva	are	true,	I
would	like	to	see	how	the	Pandavas	handle	him.	We	will	not	always	be	around	to
help	 them.	 Let	 us	 see	 how	 the	 new	 generation	 copes	 with	 these	 problems.	 They
need	experience	in	governance	and	it	will	be	good	for	everyone	if	the	Pandavas
make	 their	 headquarters	 at	 Khandiva,	 and	 rule	 half	 the	 kingdom	 from	 there.	 I
sounded	Suyodhana	on	the	idea	and	he	does	not	perceive	any	problem.	The	 boy
has	yet	to	come	out	of	his	depression	over	losing	his	girl	to	Arjuna,	but	I	think	he
is	mature	enough	not	to	mix	personal	issues	with	the	public	good.”
“I	am	not	sure	about	Suyodhana’s	intentions.	The	house	of	lac	in	Varanavata...”
Bhishma	did	not	allow	Vidhura	to	complete	his	sentence.	“The	less	we	talk	about
Varanavata	 the	 better.	 You	 personally	 investigated	 the	 matter	 and	 should	 know
better.	The	only	thing	that	points	to	a	conspiracy	is	that	the	house	was	built	with
highly	inflammable	materials.	Purochana,	the	person	who	built	it,	also	perished	in
the	unfortunate	accident.	Initially	we	thought	the	Pandavas	had	died	in	the	fire,	but
your	 investigations	revealed	that	 the	poor	Nishada	woman	and	her	five	innocent
sons	 were	 the	 victims.	 Who	 is	 responsible	 for	 their	 murder?	 Suyodhana	 or	 the
Pandavas?	 We	 thought	 of	 Purochana	 as	 a	 corrupt	 man,	 but	 when	 we	 visited	 his
house	after	his	demise,	it	did	not	look	prosperous	at	all.	His	widow	is	living	on

the	small	pension	I	have	sanctioned.	Why	did	such	a	man	give	his	life	attempting
to	save	an	Untouchable?	If	there	was	a	conspiracy	to	finish	off	Kunti	and	her	sons,
I	am	sure	Suyodhana	was	not	responsible	for	it.	Have	we	forgotten	the	farce	when
Kunti	accused	the	Crown	Prince	of	murdering	Bhima	and	we	wasted	Court	time
conducting	a	trial?”
“Very	 well	 Sir,	 I	 will	 make	 the	 arrangements.	 Another	 important	 issue	 is	 that
Krishna	 has	 taken	 Bhima	 and	 Arjuna	 to	 Magadha.	 I	 do	 not	 know	 why.”	 Vidhura
felt	awkward	about	raising	the	matter	with	the	Grand	Regent,	given	his	opinion	on
the	Varanavata	case.
“I	 know,”	 Bhishma	 responded.	 “I	 do	 not	 know	 what	 Krishna	 is	 up	 to	 this	 time.
Last	time	he	took	Arjuna	with	him,	we	know	what	happened	with	Subhadra.	I	do
not	know	what	his	agenda	is.	Bhima	has	sired	a	boy	with	an	Asura	tribal	woman,
hasn’t	he?”
“Yes,	 her	 name	 is	 Hidumbi.	 Bhima	 killed	 her	 brother	 in	 a	 drunken	 brawl.	 Since
Draupadi	 was	 with	 Yudhishtra	 for	 a	 year	 at	 the	 time,	 Kunti	 allowed	 Bhima	 to
marry	her.	They	have	a	son	called	Khatotkacha,”	Vidhura	said	flatly.
“Sometimes	I	am	embarrassed	by	the	doings	of	Kunti	and	her	sons.	I	do	not	know
which	book	they	refer	to	on	morals	and	dharma.	Let	us	hope	Bhima	and	Arjuna’s
visit	 to	 Magadha	 with	 Krishna,	 is	 for	 some	 good	 reason.	 Convey	 the	 decision
about	 Khandiva	 to	 the	 King,	 and	 request	 his	 official	 sanction.	 Let	 us	 hope
everything	turns	out	well,”	Bhishma	said	with	a	weary	sigh.	He	was	getting	tired
of	running	the	country.	The	idea	of	leaving	everything	behind	and	going	to	live	in
the	Himalayas,	in	search	of	peace	and	God,	was	most	appealing.
Vidhura	bowed	and	left	to	speak	with	King	Dhritarashtra	about	the	arrangements.
***

“Khandiva!	 Who	 wants	 that	 hell?	 Mother,	 we	 have	 been	 duped	 again.”	 Nakula
was	furious	when	he	read	the	order	from	the	King.
“It	is	all	swamp	and	jungle	and	infested	with	wild	beasts	and	guerrillas,”	cried	his
twin	Sahadeva,	in	annoyance.
“Do	 not	 get	 agitated.	 Let	 us	 wait	 until	 Krishna	 returns	 from	 Magadha.	 He	 will

know	what	to	do.”	Yudhishtra	returned	to	his	meditation.
So	the	three	brothers,	an	indifferent	wife,	and	an	anxious	mother,	awaited	Arjuna
and	Bhima’s	return	from	their	mission.	They	had	an	empire	to	build.
***

Meanwhile,	Krishna,	Arjuna	and	Bhima	had	reached	Magadha.	They	arrived	at	the
city	gates	and	requested	permission	to	see	King	Jarasandha.	They	did	not	have	to
wait	for	long.	Krishna	was	surprised	at	the	warm	hospitality	extended	to	them	by
the	 King	 of	 Magadha,	 who	 was	 a	 great	 devotee	 of	 Lord	 Shiva.	 He	 arranged	 a
dinner	in	honour	of	Krishna,	in	the	courtyard	of	the	gigantic	Shiva	temple.	Krishna
looked	 around.	 He	 needed	 a	 provocation	 for	 his	 plan	 to	 work.	 Arjuna	 was
engrossed	 in	 polite	 conversation	 with	 Jarasandha.	 Krishna’s	 eyes	 stopped	 at
General	 Hiranyadhanus,	 sitting	 beside	 Bhima,	 quietly	 eating.	 Nowhere	 in	 India,
other	than	in	Jarasandha’s	Magadha,	would	an	Untouchable	have	sat	with	the	King
and	eaten	as	an	equal.	Unmindful	of	the	illustrious	General	beside	him,	Bhima	was
gobbling	 the	 food	 as	 if	 he	 had	 not	 eaten	 for	 days.	 It	 took	 Krishna	 some	 time	 to
catch	his	eye.	He	gestured	to	him	to	topple	over	the	tumbler	of	water,	placed	as
per	custom	to	the	left	of	his	plantain	leaf,	onto	the	leaf	of	the	General.	Bhima	did
not	 understand	 this	 strange	 request,	 but	 he	 was	 never	 troubled	 by	 reasons	 and
doubt.	What	Krishna	asked,	he	always	obeyed	without	hesitation.	He	toppled	the
glass	 of	 water	 as	 if	 by	 accident,	 and	 the	 water	 flowed	 onto	 the	 General’s	 leaf.
Reacting	quickly,	the	General	tried	to	push	the	water	away	and	a	few	droplets	fell
on	Bhima.
“Hey,	this	is	a	slight!”	Krishna	cried	jumping	up.	Everyone	looked	up	from	their
plates	in	surprise.
Bhima	picked	up	his	cue.	“How	dare	you	to	throw	dirty	water	onto	a	Kshatriya,
you	Untouchable?”	Bhima	slammed	his	fist	on	the	table	with	great	force.
No	 one	 dared	 talk	 to	 the	 General	 that	 way	 and	 Jarasandha	 stood	 up	 angrily.
“Prince	 Bhima,	 please	 apologize	 to	 General	 Hiranyadhanus	 immediately.	 There
are	 limits	 to	 even	 my	 hospitality.	 You	 cannot	 come	 to	 my	 palace	 and	 insult	 my
friend	and	Commander-in-Chief,	and	hope	to	get	away	with	it.”
“Your	Highness,	it	is	nothing,”	Hiranyadhanus	said	to	the	enraged	King,	with	quiet

dignity.	 Turning	 to	 Bhima,	 he	 said,	 “Sir,	 it	 was	 my	 fault!	 Please	 accept	 my
apologies.”
“You	have	insulted	a	Kshatriya	and	will	know	the	wrath	of	a	warrior.	I	challenge
you	to	a	duel.”	Bhima	stamped	the	ground	in	a	great	show	of	anger.
Hiranyadhanus	hesitated,	surprised	by	the	Pandava’s	words.
“No	Bhima,	leave	it.	It	seems	the	General	is	not	willing	to	accept	your	challenge.
He	is	but	a	prop	in	the	King’s	Court	and	holds	his	office	because	Jarasandha	has
made	 an	 undeserving	 man	 his	 Commander-in-Chief,”	 Krishna	 said,	 the	 smile
never	leaving	his	lips.
The	 General	 had	 no	 choice.	 The	 eyes	 of	 his	 subordinate	 officers	 and	 soldiers
were	upon	him.	If	 he	 backed	away	from	Bhima’s	challenge,	he	would	lose	their
respect.	He	had	lived	honourably	all	his	life,	served	his	master	and	country	well,
and	wished	to	die	with	his	head	held	high.	Though	he	knew	he	was	no	match	for
the	young	Pandava,	thirty	 years	younger	than	him,	he	accepted	the	challenge	and
walked	away	to	wash	his	hands.	He	bowed	before	the	small	niche	holding	a	Shiva
linga.	Touching	his	forehead	and	chest	in	surrender	to	the	will	of	God,	he	said	his
final	prayers	calmly.	Lord	Shiva	had	been	kind	to	him.	He	had	reached	a	position
which	no	low	caste	could	dream	of.	His	only	regret	was	that	he	would	not	see	his
son,	Ekalavya.	“Lord,	take	care	of	my	son,”	he	prayed	before	straightening	up	and
walking	towards	Jarasandha.
The	 General	 looked	 at	 the	 man	 who	 had	 stood	 staunchly	 beside	 him,	 braving
orthodoxy	 and	 entrusting	 the	 army	 to	 him.	 Jarasandha	 hugged	 the	 General,
whispering	into	his	ear,	“We	have	been	trapped	Hiranya.	None	of	them	will	leave
Magadha	alive.	If	anything	happens	to	you,	I	will	kill	them	with	my	bare	hands.”
The	General	nodded	and	said,	“Farewell	Your	Highness.	My	heart	remains	at	your
feet	forever.”
When	the	duel	started,	Bhima	thought	he	would	finish	off	the	older	man	in	minutes.
However,	the	Pandava	soon	realized	the	veteran	General	was	no	walkover.	With
grit	and	determination,	he	fought	Bhima,	matching	the	sheer	size	of	his	opponent
with	 his	 experience	 and	 skill.	 Two	 hours	 later,	 the	 duel	 was	 still	 on,	 going
nowhere.	The	General	had	Bhima	flat	on	the	ground	twice,	but	respecting	the	code

of	warriors;	he	patiently	waited	for	him	to	get	up	on	both	occasions.	But	age	had
its	 disadvantages	 and	 as	 time	 progressed,	 the	 General	 began	 showing	 signs	 of
fatigue.	Bhima,	sensing	his	opponent	was	tiring,	got	his	chance	when	the	General
slipped	and	fell.	Bhima	had	been	taught	no	code	of	honour	was	applicable	when
doing	one’s	karma,	so	he	pounced	on	the	fallen	man,	pinning	him	to	the	ground.	In
one	swift	movement,	he	broke	the	neck	of	the	first	Nishada	General	of	India.
Seeing	 his	 dear	 friend	 die,	 Jarasandha	 lost	 his	 cool	 and	 jumped	 into	 the	 fray,
roaring	with	rage	and	indignation.	Krishna	smiled	at	the	reaction	of	the	Magadha
King.	It	was	precisely	what	he	had	expected.	He	always	advised	anyone	willing
to	listen,	that	attachment	was	the	root	of	all	misery	and	unhappiness.	Equanimity	is
the	virtue	leading	to	moksha.	But	the	foolish	monarch	had	lost	his	composure	on
seeing	his	 friend	die.	Jarasandha	was	thus	an	ignorant	man,	lost	 in	 the	 world	 of
illusion.	Attached	to	his	dead	friend,	he	did	not	have	the	wisdom	to	know	that	the
soul	did	not	perish	and	death	was	but	an	illusion.	He	did	not	know	that	his	friend
had	 merely	 changed	 garb	 and	 his	 soul	 had	 gone	 in	 search	 of	 another	 body	 to
inhabit.	 Bhima	 had	 not	 killed	 the	 General’s	 soul,	 so	 the	 General	 had	 not	 died	 at
Bhima’s	hands.	All	this	was	but	maya.
Bhima	looked	at	the	body	of	his	seventy-year-old	opponent	and	laughed	aloud.	He
kicked	the	corpse	to	one	side	and	rushed	to	grab	Jarasandha	in	his	huge	arms.	The
King	 deftly	 moved	 aside	 and	 caught	 Bhima’s	 neck	 in	 the	 crook	 of	 his	 left	 arm.
With	 his	 powerful	 right	 hand,	 he	 began	 beating	 the	 life	 out	 of	 the	 lout.	 Bhima
struggled	in	vain,	looking	pleadingly	at	his	saviour.	He	received	a	message	from
Krishna’s	eyes	and	delivered	a	punch	to	Jarasandha’s	groin,	which	freed	him	from
the	death	grip.	The	King	doubled	over	in	pain	and	anger,	and	spat	at	his	opponent.
Not	even	common	soldiers	hit	below	the	belt	in	battle.	But	Bhima,	unquestioning
as	always,	was	simply	following	the	instructions	of	his	Lord.	He	rushed	towards
his	 opponent	 and	 shoved	 him	 to	 the	 ground.	 He	 tried	 jumping	 onto	 Jarasandha’s
chest	as	he	had	done	with	the	General,	but	the	elderly	King	still	had	a	few	tricks
and	rolled	away	at	the	last	moment.	Bhima	fell	flat.	Jarasandha	was	atop	him	in	a
flash.	He	tried	wringing	Bhima’s	neck,	but	the	Pandava	managed	to	wriggle	away.
Jarasandha	 knew	 his	 time	 was	 running	 out.	 In	 a	 prolonged	 duel,	 he	 was	 sure	 he
would	meet	the	same	fate	as	his	friend.
Krishna	watched	the	contest	with	interest.	True	to	his	philosophy,	he	did	not	have
any	attachment	towards	Bhima	or	any	of	the	Pandavas,	all	of	whom	were	willing
to	live	and	die	for	him.	He	was	too	wise	for	that.	If	a	Bhima	or	Arjuna	died,	there

were	 hundreds	 to	 take	 their	 place.	 Yet,	 Jarasandha’s	 victory	 would	 go	 against
everything	 he	 believed	 and	 lived	 for.	 Bhima	 was	 more	 useful	 than	 even	 Arjuna,
who	 had	 the	 habit	 of	 asking	 uncomfortable	 questions.	 The	 giant	 Bhima	 just
obeyed.	He	had	larger	plans	and	uses	for	Bhima,	whereas	Jarasandha	was	just	a
pawn	on	his	chessboard.	He	could	not	afford	to	risk	his	rook	for	a	pawn.	Krishna
brought	out	a	betel	leaf	and	waited	for	Bhima	to	look	at	him.	When	Bhima	caught
his	eye,	he	tore	the	leaf	into	two,	throwing	the	halves	to	either	side	of	him.	Bhima
nodded	his	understanding.
When	 Jarasandha	 fell	 again,	 he	 expected	 Bhima	 to	 rush	 for	 his	 neck	 and	 was
ready.	Surprising	him,	the	Pandava	caught	his	right	leg	and	pinned	Jarasandha	to
the	 ground	 by	 placing	 his	 huge	 feet	 on	 the	 fallen	 King’s	 left	 leg.	 Then,	 using	 his
massive	strength,	he	started	tearing	Jarasandha	in	two,	from	the	groin.	Jarasandha
screamed	in	agony	as	inch	by	inch,	Bhima	tore	him	apart.	The	great	Jarasandha,
the	 man	 who	 had	 attacked	 Mathura	 seventeen	 times	 and	 caused	 Krishna	 and
Balarama	to	flee	to	Dwaraka,	the	man	who	had	dared	challenge	orthodoxy	and	the
holy	smritis	by	building	and	running	a	kingdom	based	on	merit	and	not	caste,	died
slowly	and	painfully	for	all	his	sins.
Bhima	celebrated	his	victory	by	beating	his	fists	on	his	broad	chest.	Krishna	knew
better.	He	had	seen	the	unrest	in	the	soldiers’	ranks	at	the	death	of	their	General
and	then	their	King.	The	last	thing	he	wanted	was	a	riot.	He	ran	to	where	he	knew
the	city	prison	was	located.	Sensing	danger,	Bhima	followed	him.	Krishna	asked
Arjuna	 to	 keep	 the	 agitated	 soldiers	 at	 bay	 somehow,	 and	 ran	 on.	 His	 spies	 in
Jarasandha’s	 palace	 joined	 him	 as	 per	 plan.	 His	 aim	 was	 to	 free	 the	 ninety-five
vassal	 Kings	 imprisoned	 by	 Jarasandha	 for	 disobeying	 him	 years	 ago.	 Most	 of
them	had	rebelled	against	his	liberal	policies	at	one	time	or	another.	Among	them
was	 Sudeva,	 Jarasandha’s	 son,	 who	 had	 attempted	 a	 coup	 when	 his	 father	 had
made	an	Untouchable	the	Commander-in-Chief.
Krishna	 opened	 the	 doors	 and	 freed	 the	 prisoners	 quickly.	 They	 ran	 to	 where
Arjuna	 and	 a	 few	 of	 his	 newfound	 supporters	 were	 trying	 to	 pacify	 the	 agitated
soldiers.	The	sight	of	the	Crown	Prince	of	Magadha	calmed	the	situation	a	little.
Krishna	addressed	the	soldiers	saying	the	General	and	King	had	both	fought	and
died	 as	 Kshatriyas.	 It	 was	 the	 dharma	 of	 a	 Kshatriya	 to	 fight	 and	 they	 had
achieved	 moksha	 by	 doing	 their	 karma.	 With	 silver-tongued	 oratory,	 Krishna
pacified	 the	 soldiers.	 Sudeva,	 the	 darling	 of	 the	 conservatives,	 became	 the	 new
King	of	Magadha	before	the	embers	of	his	father	and	the	General’s	funeral	pyres

had	cooled.
When	 Krishna	 and	 his	 friends	 finally	 left	 Magadha,	 a	 small	 section	 of	 the
Magadha	army,	who	were	loyal	to	the	dead	King	and	Commander,	broke	away	and
fled	towards	the	vassal	kingdom	of	Chedi,	to	seek	asylum.	The	ruler	of	Chedi	was
Shishupala,	an	old	friend	of	Jarasandha.	On	the	way,	the	soldiers	met	the	son	of
the	 slain	 General	 Hiranyadhanus.	 Ekalavya	 was	 devastated	 when	 he	 heard	 the
news	of	his	father’s	death.	He	had	longed	to	meet	him.
On	their	way	back	to	Hastinapura,	Krishna	heard	about	the	rebels.	It	was	a	minor
problem	and	he	would	deal	with	it	when	the	time	came.	It	proved	to	be	a	costly
mistake	for	the	master	strategist.
***

“Think	 of	 it	 not	 as	 a	 problem	 but	 an	 opportunity,”	 Krishna	 told	 Yudhishtra,
smiling.
“But	Khandiva	is	an	impenetrable	forest	and	is	said	to	be	infested	with	all	sorts	of
beasts	and	fierce	tribes.	How	am	I	to	build	a	city	there?	My	uncle	Dhritarashtra
has	 done	 this	 to	 spite	 us.”	 Yudhishtra	 was	 trying	 to	 keep	 calm,	 but	 the	 more	 he
thought	about	the	injustice	of	it,	the	angrier	he	became.
“Why	are	you	worried	when	I	am	here,	my	friend?	I	think	Arjuna	and	I	will	take
one	more	journey,	this	time	to	Khandiva.”	Krishna	smiled	at	Arjuna	and	the	great
warrior	smiled	back	uncertainly.
Within	 a	 week,	 Krishna	 and	 Arjuna,	 moved	 towards	 Khandiva	 forest	 with	 their
army.	On	the	way,	Krishna	told	Arjuna	the	pathetic	story	of	the	last	Indra,	to	whom
the	forest	actually	belonged.	When	they	neared	the	low	hills	of	Khandiva,	Krishna
said	something	that	almost	made	the	Pandava	fall	from	his	saddle.
“What	 do	 you	 mean?	 You	 are	 confirming	 my	 worst	 suspicions.	 You	 mean	 my
cousin	Suyodhana	was	always	right	in	calling	us	bastards?	I	thought	the	story	of	us
being	the	sons	of	Gods	was	just	propaganda.	Now	you	are	saying	my	father	lives
and	 is	 a	 Prince	 of	 the	 fallen	 Deva	 dynasty?”	 a	 shocked	 Arjuna	 asked	 Krishna,
trembling	with	anger.
His	 friend	 smiled	 enigmatically.	 “It	 does	 not	 matter.	 Ask	 your	 mother.	 Or	 if	 you

meet	 Indra,	 ask	 him.	 You	 are	 the	 last	 Indra’s	 son,	 Arjuna.	 Be	 proud	 of	 it.	 The
present	Indra	might	be	an	incompetent	man,	but	the	blood	of	illustrious	ancestors
flows	in	your	veins.”
“But	that	means	we	do	not	have	any	right	to	the	crown	of	Hastinapura.	It	means
Suyodhana	should	inherit	the	kingdom.	We	are	mere	bastards	and	he	the	firstborn
of	the	incumbent	King.	More	than	that,	my	uncle	Dhritarashtra	is	the	elder	son	and
rightful	 heir,	 and	 my	 father	 Pandu…	 he	 had	 no	 claim	 to	 the	 throne.	 What	 is	 the
point,	Krishna?	Why	are	you	making	me	do	all	this?”	Arjuna	looked	at	his	friend
in	confusion.
“Arjuna	 my	 dear	 friend…	 do	 not	 worry	 over	 such	 minor	 matters.	 Your	 brother
Yudhishtra	 is	 the	 only	 person	 who	 can	 save	 our	 country	 from	 adharma.
Duryodhana	 becoming	 King	 will	 spell	 disaster	 for	 this	 holy	 land.	 Just	 look	 at
whom	 he	 befriends	 –	 Karna	 the	 Suta,	 Aswathama	 the	 fallen	 Brahmin,	 Kripa	 the
mad	 man,	 Carvaka	 the	 atheist,	 and	 the	 list	 goes	 on.	 Imagine	 him	 ruling.	 Imagine
what	would	happen	to	the	system	our	ancestors	built	with	so	much	thought.	What
would	happen	to	our	social	order?	His	being	the	firstborn	of	the	King	is	a	mere
technicality.	Do	not	bother	about	such	things.	When	the	time	comes,	we	will	see.
Now,	do	your	duty	as	a	Kshatriya.	Your	focus	should	only	be	to	destroy	Khandiva.
From	its	ashes,	a	new	city	will	rise	and	from	that	city,	India	will	be	ruled.”
Krishna	 saw	 doubt	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	 young	 warrior.	 “Arjuna,	 one	 day	 I	 will
explain	all	these	things	to	you.	Let	the	time	come	and	I	will	clear	all	your	doubts.	I
will	teach	you	what	your	karma	and	dharma	are.	For	now,	let	us	focus	on	the	task
ahead.	You	Pandavas	need	your	own	kingdom	to	take	on	the	might	of	Duryodhana.
Do	you	wish	to	keep	your	wives	in	a	hut	forever?	Do	the	Princesses	not	deserve
better?	For	the	sake	of	your	mother	and	your	brothers,	fight!”
Krishna’s	words	struck	a	chord	within	Arjuna.	His	mother	and	brothers	deserved
better.	Draupadi,	the	Princess	he	had	won	with	his	skill,	and	Subhadra,	whom	he
loved	more	than	his	own	life,	deserved	better.	Krishna	was	showing	him	the	path
of	 progress	 and	 civilization.	 A	 forest	 was	 nothing	 but	 some	 trees	 and	 shrubs.	 It
housed	birds	and	beasts.	It	was	home	to	a	few	uncivilized	tribes.	It	was	his	duty	to
show	 them	 the	 light.	 Krishna	 was	 right.	 The	 forest	 needed	 to	 be	 gutted.	 In	 its
place,	a	city	would	come	up.	Where	hills	stood,	towers	of	progress	would	rise.
The	 tall	 trees	 should	 give	 way	 to	 shops.	 Where	 tigers	 roamed,	 chariots	 would
speed,	and	where	mountain	streams	flowed,	sewers	would	run.

Arjuna	looked	 at	 the	 vast	 expanse	 of	 green	 hills	 to	 the	 East.	 The	 river	 Yamuna
snaked	 her	 way	 through	 the	 forest,	 playing	 hide-and-seek	 among	 the	 woods,	 her
dark	 waters	 contrasting	 with	 the	 lush	 greenery	 on	 either	 bank.	 A	 flock	 of	 birds
swooped	though	the	sky	and	vanished	into	the	canopy	of	trees	with	poignant	cries.
The	 air	 was	 rich	 with	 the	 aroma	 of	 flowers,	 and	 butterflies	 of	 many	 colours
fluttered	 around	 him.	 There	 was	 a	 promise	 of	 rain	 in	 the	 air.	 Somewhere	 in	 the
womb	 of	 the	 jungle,	 a	 peacock	 cried	 in	 anticipation	 of	 love.	 A	 moist	 breeze
rustled	 the	 leaves	 and	 tugged	 at	 Arjuna’s	 clothes,	 caressing	 his	 handsome	 face,
and	 then	 leaving	 with	 a	 sigh.	 It	 started	 drizzling	 and	 a	 rainbow	 arched	 over	 the
green	 forest.	 The	 croaking	 of	 frogs	 kept	 time	 to	 the	 symphony	 of	 crickets	 as	 the
rain	fell	gently	on	the	earth.	The	great	warrior	went	soft	at	the	knees.	His	strong
hands	holding	his	bow	trembled.	“Krishna...”	he	pleaded.
But	Krishna’s	face	remained	impassive.	When	the	sky	had	dried	its	tears,	the	man
who	 believed	 he	 was	 God,	 steadied	 the	 warrior’s	 hands	 and	 commanded	 in	 a
calm	voice,	“Fire!”
A	 flame-tipped	 arrow	 arched	 over	 the	 treetops	 and	 plunged	 into	 the	 heart	 of	 the
forest.	 The	 warriors	 with	 Arjuna	 began	 decimating	 the	 forest	 with	 enthusiasm.
Soon	 the	 hungry	 God	 of	 Fire	 began	 devouring	 the	 forest	 with	 gusto.	 The	 army
encircled	the	forest	and	stood	in	strategic	positions	to	prevent	the	escape	of	any
human	or	beast	attempting	to	flee	the	flames.	When	the	first	deer	darted	out	of	the
jungle	 in	 panic,	 Krishna	 cried	 to	 Arjuna,	 “There!”	 The	 warrior	 shot	 an	 arrow
through	 its	 heart.	 It	 fell,	 quivering	 for	 a	 few	 minutes	 and	 then	 dying	 without	 a
sound,	 its	 glassy	 gaze	 fixed	 on	 Arjuna.	 The	 Pandava	 read	 accusation	 in	 those
gentle	eyes	and	a	strange	fear	gripped	him.
“You	are	doing	your	duty,	Arjuna.	You	have	freed	the	poor	animal	from	the	infinite
cycle	of	suffering	through	numerous	births	and	deaths.	I	have	given	it	moksha.	Do
not	 hesitate…	 there…	 see	 those	 birds...	 shoot!”	 Krishna	 cried,	 and	 the	 warrior
obeyed.
The	creatures	of	the	forest	began	fleeing	the	raging	fire	in	panic.	Arjuna	and	his
warriors	cut	them	down	mercilessly.	If	they	missed	anything,	the	Lord	pointed	it
out	and	the	men	obeyed.	“Not	a	single	living	thing	should	escape.	Show	no	mercy.
We	will	build	a	great	city	here	and	a	proper	cleansing	is	required	before	we	begin
something	 new.	 Shoot	 down	 everything	 moving,	 flying	 or	 crawling.”	 Krishna
encouraged	the	men	with	his	words.

Soon	 the	 ground	 was	 littered	 with	 the	 corpses	 of	 animals,	 birds,	 and	 reptiles.
Sensing	danger,	some	ran	back	into	the	fire,	expecting	more	mercy	from	the	flames
than	 from	 Man.	 The	 fire	 welcomed	 them,	 granting	 them	 moksha	 from	 this
worthless	life.	The	air	was	heavy	with	the	stench	of	burning	bodies.
Inside	 the	 forest,	 there	 were	 over	 2000	 Nagas	 in	 the	 rebel	 camp.	 They	 were
mostly	old	men,	women,	and	children,	as	Takshaka	had	taken	most	of	his	warriors
to	 Dandakaranya	 in	 the	 South.	 The	 rebel	 army	 was	 penetrating	 the	 South	 and
Takshaka	 had	 thought	 it	 prudent	 to	 meet	 the	 leaders	 of	 the	 southern	 Nagas	 to
prepare	 them	 for	 the	 impending	 revolution.	 He	 had	 not	 expected	 an	 attack	 on
Khandiva	and	had	left	security	in	the	hands	of	young	Aswasena.
When	 the	 first	 arrow	 landed	 on	 his	 thatched	 roof	 with	 a	 hiss,	 Mayasura	 the
architect	was	sitting	in	the	small	veranda	of	his	hut,	enjoying	the	beautiful	sight	of
the	 rainbow.	 He	 looked	 up	 in	 surprise	 as	 scores	 of	 flame-tipped	 arrows	 hissed
over	his	head.	A	few	of	the	other	men	came	out	of	their	huts	and	stood	looking	at
the	skies	in	surprise	and	shock.	Before	they	could	react,	their	huts	began	going	up
in	flames.	The	panicked	screams	of	women	and	children	rose	in	a	macabre	chorus.
“What	 are	 you	 gaping	 at,	 you	 fools?	 Get	 the	 women	 and	 children	 out!”	 Vasuki
shouted	over	the	din.
Mayasura	 ran	 towards	 the	 old	 man.	 A	 few	 of	 the	 younger	 Nagas	 had	 gathered
around	 the	 erstwhile	 leader	 and	 the	 old	 man	 was	 directing	 them	 in	 the	 rescue
operations.	 As	 Mayasura	 reached	 him,	 he	 saw	 an	 angry	 Aswasena	 arguing	 with
the	old	man,	who	yelled,	“This	is	no	time	for	disagreement.	Maybe	you	are	right
and	the	fire	was	started	by	the	Prince	of	Hastinapura.	We	can	discuss	that	once	we
have	saved	ourselves.	Get	all	the	able	bodied	men	to	put	down	the	fire	and	rescue
the	weak.”
“You	 old	 fool!	 There	 is	 no	 point	 in	 fighting	 the	 fire.	 See	 how	 we	 are	 being
showered	with	flame-tipped	arrows.	We	have	to	take	them	head	on.	If	we	do	not
save	 our	 horses	 and	 arms,	 there	 will	 be	 hell	 to	 pay	 when	 the	 Great	 Leader
returns,”	Aswasena	shouted	back	as	another	hut	crumbled	beside	him.
The	tall	trees	around	them	had	caught	fire	and	the	heat	was	becoming	unbearable.
Mayasura’s	first	instinct	was	to	run	but	Vasuki’s	calm	courage	held	him	back.	The
screams	of	women	and	children	dying	in	the	flames	were	unbearable.

As	the	inferno	raged	all	around,	Aswasena	and	Vasuki	glared	at	each	other.	“You
go	and	fight	your	fool’s	war,	son.	My	first	duty	is	to	save	my	people,	rather	than	a
few	horses	and	swords,”	Vasuki	spat	on	the	ground	and	turned	away.
Aswasena	 shrugged.	 “Rot	 in	hell,”	the	 young	 man,	 yelled	 as	 he	 ran	 towards	 the
stables.	The	horses	were	whining	in	fear	as	the	fire	raced	towards	them.	Most	of
the	young	men	abandoned	Vasuki	and	followed	Aswasena.	Mayasura	watched	in
horror	as	hundreds	of	men	entered	the	burning	stables.
“What	are	you	gaping	at?	Go	and	save	your	mothers	and	sisters,”	Vasuki	barked	at
the	young	architect.
Mayasura	ran	towards	the	huts.	A	few	men	followed	him.	The	blast	of	heat	was
intense.	 The	 fire	 had	 swallowed	 many	 of	 the	 huts	 near	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 clearing.
The	smell	of	burning	flesh	was	overwhelming.	Mayasura	saw	a	group	of	women
and	 children	 huddled	 in	 the	 south	 corner	 of	 a	 clearing	 but	 wildfire	 was	 steadily
engulfing	them.	He	ran	towards	the	jungle,	trying	to	circumvent	the	fire.	If	he	could
reach	the	central	ring	of	huts	before	the	flames	did,	he	might	be	able	to	save	those
people.	 As	 he	 ran	 towards	 the	 forest,	 the	 Naga	 cavalry	 galloped	past.	 His	 eyes
briefly	 met	 those	 of	 Aswasena,	 and	 the	 Naga	 captain	 looked	 at	 him	 in	 utter
contempt	 as	 they	 rushed	 past.	 As	 far	 as	 Aswasena	 was	 concerned,	 men	 like
Mayasura	were	cowards	who	hid	behind	their	books,	despising	action.	He	did	not
have	 time	 to	 waste	 on	 such	 effeminate	 bastards.	 He	 wanted	 a	 chance	 to	 take
revenge	on	Arjuna	and	earn	the	respect	of	his	Great	Leader.
Mayasura	 watched	 them	 vanish	 behind	 the	 burning	 trees	 and	 thick	 columns	 of
smoke.	 They	 were	 rushing	 to	 take	 on	 Arjuna’s	 mighty	 army	 head	 on.	 The	 earsplitting	sound	of	a	huge	tree	crashing	jolted	him	from	his	stupor	and	he	jumped
back.	The	men	with	him	watched	the	disappearing	column	of	Aswasena’s	cavalry.
Mayasura	 shouted	 to	 them	 to	 follow	 him.	 They	 ran	 diagonally	 to	 the	 group	 of
women	and	children,	curving	away	from	the	raging	fire.	Fingers	of	flames	came
perilously	close,	trying	to	grab	them.	Mayasura	thought	his	eyeballs	would	burn	in
their	sockets	from	the	blazing	heat.	As	the	flames	danced	in	the	changing	breeze
and	 smoke	 curled	 towards	 heaven,	 he	 could	 see	 the	 frightened	 faces	 of	 the
children,	crying	in	fear.	Mayasura	leapt	across	the	flames	and	ran	towards	the	huts
standing	between	the	group	and	the	advancing	inferno.	The	men	followed.	Some	of
them	emerged	on	the	other	side,	choking	and	coughing	smoke,	beating	the	flames
from	their	clothes.	They	were	shocked	to	find	Mayasura	torching	the	huts.	A	few

screamed	that	he	was	mad.	Unmindful	of	their	protests,	 Mayasura	 kept	 throwing
flaming	 faggots	 onto	 the	 thatched	 roofs	 of	 the	 remaining	 huts.	 A	 few	 understood
what	the	architect	was	trying	to	do.	He	was	creating	a	firebreak	by	burning	down
the	 huts	 in	 the	 path	 of	 the	 advancing	 fire.	 They	 hurried	 to	 help	 him	 and	 a	 gap
quickly	appeared	in	the	path	of	the	licking	flames.	The	women	and	children	were
safe	for	now.	Though	the	fire	raged	all	around,	Mayasura	had	managed	to	create
an	island	of	safety.
Vasuki	walked	towards	them,	leaping	over	the	slowly	dying	fire	with	an	ease	that
belied	his	age.	He	sought	out	Mayasura	and	hugged	him.	A	ragged	cheer	rose	from
the	crowd	of	survivors.	The	soft	spoken	and	unassuming	architect	had	saved	their
lives.
However,	Vasuki	raised	his	staff	and	shouted	for	silence.	Then	they	heard	it.	They
could	feel	the	earth	rumbling	beneath	their	feet.	They	were	children	of	the	forest
and	knew	what	the	sound	meant.	A	despairing	wail	rose	from	the	group	of	women
and	the	children	clung	to	their	mothers	in	fright.
“Move	to	either	side	of	me…	NOW!”	Vasuki	shouted	at	the	top	of	his	lungs.	The
crowd	parted	in	two.
Mayasura,	who	had	lived	in	the	outskirts	of	southern	cities	most	of	his	life,	did	not
understand	what	the	sounds	heralded	and	wondered	why	the	forest	dwellers	were
panicking	when	he	had	saved	them	from	the	fire.	He	soon	understood.	The	charred
trees	 began	 trembling.	 Mayasura	 could	 feel	 the	 earth	 shaking	 more	 and	 more
vigorously.	 Suddenly,	 a	 herd	 of	 elephants	 broke	 from	 the	 jungle	 and	 stampeded
towards	the	group	of	humans.	In	the	distance,	flames	were	rushing	for	them.	They
waited	 anxiously	 as	 the	 herd	 trumpeted	 past;	 smashing	 everything	 in	 its	 way,
overturning	 the	 half-burnt	 trees	 and	 following	 the	 path	 Aswasena’s	 cavalry	 had
taken.	 Bison,	 rhinoceros,	 gaur,	 and	 other	 beasts	 of	 the	 jungle,	 followed	 the
elephants.	 Occasionally,	 tigers	 and	 lions	 raced	 by,	 creating	 panic.	 Exotic	 birds
screeched	 high	 in	 the	 sky.	 The	 sight	 of	 the	 stampeding	 animals	 froze	 the	 humans
with	fear.
When	 the	 last	 of	 the	 beasts	 had	 passed,	 Vasuki	 cried	 aloud,	 “Follow	 them	 now.
They	know	the	path	to	get	out	of	the	forest	fire.”
Without	waiting	for	further	instructions,	the	Nagas	joined	the	fleeing	beasts.	They

thought	they	were	escaping	the	cruel	fire,	but	at	the	other	end,	the	greatest	warrior
in	the	world	and	his	divine	friend	waited	for	them.	They	had	a	city	to	build	and	the
forest	 had	 to	 be	 cleared.	 The	 fire	 advanced	 rapidly,	 trying	 to	 grab	 the	 fleeing
humans	and	animals.	As	the	stampede	neared	the	edge	of	the	forest,	arrows	fell	on
them	thick	and	fast,	creating	further	panic	and	pandemonium.	Elephants,	bison	and
rhinoceros	began	running	amok,	some	turning	back	towards	the	advancing	flames
and	 colliding	 violently	 with	 the	 oncoming	 stampede.	 Some	 managed	 to	 pass
through	the	thick	column	of	animals	fleeing	in	the	opposite	direction	and	reach	the
Nagas	running	behind.	Women	and	children	scattered	in	fear.	Many	were	trampled
under	 the	 feet	 of	 the	 frightened	 elephants.	 When	 the	 beasts	 encountered	 the
advancing	fire,	they	once	again	turned	and	ran	back	through	the	crowd	of	Nagas,
leaving	 another	 trail	 of	 death.	 A	 few	 of	 the	 huge	 beasts	 attacked	 Arjuna’s	 men,
causing	 many	 deaths	 in	 their	 ranks,	 but	 the	 soldiers	 soon	 cut	 them	 down	 with
swords,	spears	and	poison	arrows.
“There!	 There!”	 Krishna	 kept	 pointing	 and	 Arjuna	 shot	 his	 victims	 down	 with
unfailing	accuracy.
When	 the	 surviving	 Nagas	 managed	 to	 reach	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 forest,	 the
innumerable	corpses	of	animals	and	humans	littering	the	ground	shocked	them.	As
they	fled	over	the	dead	and	dying,	a	few	slipping	and	falling	in	the	mess	of	blood
and	flesh,	Mayasura	realised	the	brave	Aswasena	and	his	band	of	soldiers	were
no	 longer	 alive.	 He	 did	 not	 know	 how	 many	 had	 died	 in	 his	 own	 group.	 Death
danced	around	them.	Many	of	the	Nagas	stood	frozen	in	fear,	not	knowing	what	to
do	 until	 death	 caught	 up	 with	 them.	 Mayasura	 was	 sure	 his	 own	 death	 was
imminent.	 He	 saw	 Vasuki	 trying	 to	 control	 the	 people’s	 panic.	The	 sight	 of	 him
standing	 with	 unflinching	 courage	 amidst	 the	 fearsome	 bloodbath	 was	 aweinspiring.
“Mayasura…	save	the	Deva	King…”	Vasuki	shouted	at	him.
Mayasura	looked	to	where	Vasuki	pointed	and	saw	an	enraged	elephant	charging
at	Indra.	The	old	Deva	King	stood	staring	at	certain	death.	Mayasura	ran	towards
him,	trying	not	to	think	about	the	arrows	flying	perilously	close.	The	elephant	had
knocked	down	Indra	with	its	trunk	and	raised	a	foot	to	crush	the	old	man’s	head.
Without	 thinking,	 Mayasura	 dived,	 grabbed	 Indra,	 and	 rolled	 to	 his	 left.	 The
elephant’s	heavy	foot	descended	with	juddering	force.	Another	two	inches	and	the
old	 King	 would	 have	 been	 pulp.	 The	 elephant	 lumbered	 away	 while	 Mayasura

helped	 the	 trembling	 Indra	 stand	 up.	 His	 heart	 leapt	 with	 joy	 when	 he	 saw
Vasuki’s	curt	nod	of	appreciation.	He	had	never	suspected	he	possessed	so	much
courage.	For	a	moment,	he	forgot	where	he	was	and	felt	proud	of	himself.
Indra’s	grip	tightened	painfully	on	Mayasura’s	wrist	and	shook	him	out	of	his	selfcongratulatory	 reflections.	 He	 saw	 the	 resigned	 look	 on	 the	 old	 man’s	 face	 and
turned	to	see	what	had	created	so	much	fear.	What	he	saw	chilled	his	blood.	All
his	 courage	 oozed	 away.	 The	 elephant	 was	 returning	 for	 its	 kill,	 rushing	 toward
them	at	great	speed.	The	young	Asura	and	the	fallen	Deva	King,	stood	immobile,
hands	 clasped,	 fascinated	 by	 the	 sight	 of	 approaching	 death.	 They	 could	 faintly
hear	Vasuki	screaming	at	them	to	move	out	of	the	elephant’s	path,	but	their	limbs
refused	 to	 move.	 They	 could	 see	 the	 elephant’s	 eyes	 as	 the	 huge	 shaking	 form
approached	them	in	a	cloud	of	dust.	They	closed	their	eyes	when	the	elephant	was
barely	six	feet	away.	Its	trunk	almost	scraped	Mayasura’s	waist	before	collapsing
with	an	earth-shaking	thud.	When	the	dust	settled	and	their	heartbeats	returned	to
normal,	 they	 saw	 an	 arrow	 had	 pierced	 almost	 three	 feet	 into	 the	 brain	 of	 the
beast.	The	elephant	quivered	for	a	few	seconds	and	died.
Mayasura	 looked	 back	 to	 trace	 the	 flight	 path	 of	 the	 arrow	 and	 saw	 Arjuna
standing	tall,	aiming	at	his	throat.	Petrified,	he	pulled	his	wrist	from	Indra’s	grip
and	ran.	The	arrow	hummed	past	his	right	ear.	On	an	impulse,	he	turned	and	ran
towards	Arjuna,	both	hands	raised	high	above	his	head	in	the	universal	gesture	of
surrender.	“Swami…	Swami…”	he	cried,	trying	to	be	heard	above	the	din.
Krishna	saw	him	and	pointed	him	out	to	the	great	Warrior	to	pick	him	off.	Arjuna
aimed	 his	 arrow	 at	 Mayasura	 but	 something	 in	 the	 young	 man’s	 eyes	 made	 him
hesitate.	Mayasura	stumbled	and	fell	as	he	neared	Arjuna,	but	got	up	and	ran	on.
He	fell	at	Arjuna’s	feet,	pleading	for	the	life	of	his	people.	“Swami…	Swami…
have	mercy	on	us,”	he	begged.	“We	shall	be	your	slaves	for	life.	There	are	only
small	 children	 and	 helpless	 women	 here.	 All	 the	 warriors	 are	 dead.	 Please
forgive	us	for	what	we	have	done…”	He	was	sobbing	hysterically.
Arjuna	looked	at	his	Lord	for	advice.	“Hmmm…	maybe	they	can	be	of	some	use,”
Krishna	said.	“Ask	him	what	he	can	do.”
Mayasura’s	 sobbing	 suddenly	 stopped.	 He	 was	 an	 architect,	 a	 sculptor,	 an
engineer,	 and	 now	 he	 was	 a	 slave.	 He	 felt	 reticent	 to	 declare	 his	 talent	 before
these	great	men,	but	stood	up	slowly.	He	needed	some	wet	sand	to	say	it	with	his

fingers.	 Mere	 words	 would	 not	 suffice.	 He	 found	 what	 he	 was	 looking	 for	 and
began	moulding	it	with	his	fingers.	It	did	not	matter	that	the	blood	of	his	people
and	 many	 mute	 beasts	 had	 wet	 the	 sand.	 He	 was	 indifferent	 to	 the	 dead	 bodies
around	 him.	 He	 did	 not	 hear	 the	 sound	 of	 humans	 and	 beasts	 dying.	 He	 did	 not
think	 about	 his	 almost	 certain	 death	 a	 few	 minutes	 before.	 He	 had	 become	 one
with	 his	 creation.	 He	 went	 into	 a	 trance	 as	 his	 fingers	 caressed	 and	 slapped	 the
red	mud.	From	it,	a	city	began	rising	like	magic.
Arjuna	 watched	 fascinated.	 He	 ordered	 his	 soldiers	 to	 stop	 the	 massacre.	 They
too,	crowded	around	to	watch	the	Asura	building	his	city	of	sand.	Half	the	Nagas
had	perished	in	the	carnage	and	the	forest	of	Khandiva	was	history.	A	few	animals
managed	 to	 scurry	 away	 as	 the	 men	 stood	 watching	 a	 dream	 unfolding.	 The
surviving	 women	 and	 children	 joined	 the	 crowd	 around	 Mayasura.	 The	 young
architect	was	unaware	of	his	surroundings,	nor	did	not	know	his	skill	had	saved
the	 lives	 of	 his	 people	 yet	 again.	 From	 his	 fingers	 a	 model	 city	 rose.	 He	 built
palaces	and	fashioned	ornate	temple	pagodas	that	reached	towards	the	skies.	They
watched	him	create	city	streets,	fountains,	walkways,	gardens,	market	places,	and
beautiful	lakes.
When	 he	 finished,	 Arjuna	 forgot	 himself	 and	 hugged	 the	 Untouchable.	 “Can	 you
build	this	in	stone	for	us?”	the	great	warrior	asked	the	little	man.
Mayasura	fell	to	the	ground,	kissing	Arjuna’s	feet	in	gratitude.	A	cheer	rose	from
the	crowd.	Mayasura	had	been	granted	his	dream.

24	A	CITY	CURSED
SUYODHANA	 TRIED	 BLOTTING	 OUT	 the	misery	of	losing	Subhadra	by	working	 with

even	 more	 passion.	 He	 was	 being	 trained	to	 rule	 the	 kingdom	 by	 Bhishma.	 But
with	 the	 Pandavas	 back	 in	 the	 palace,	 he	 was	 afraid	 of	 meeting	 Subhadra
somewhere	with	her	husband,	and	he	tried	staying	away	from	Hastinapura	as	much
as	possible,	travelling	to	the	remote	areas	of	the	kingdom	and	visiting	nondescript
villages	 and	 distant	 border	 towns.	 Aswathama	 was	 his	 constant	 companion	 on
these	 journeys.	 Suyodhana	 also	 accompanied	 Vidhura	 on	 his	 official	 tours.	 His
admiration	for	the	Prime	Minister	increased	with	every	trip.	Sometimes	he	found
time	to	visit	his	sister	Sushala	in	Sindh.	Then	Karna	would	travel	there	too,	and
the	 friends	 would	 meet.	 On	 some	 of	 the	 trips	 to	 Sindh,	 they	 would	 impulsively
travel	on	to	Dwaraka,	to	see	Balarama.	They	avoided	the	days	they	knew	Krishna
would	be	present.	It	helped	that	Krishna	was	often	with	the	Pandavas	in	Khandiva,
where	 their	 new	 city	 was	 coming	 up.	 The	 relationship	 between	 Subhadra	 and
Balarama	was	no	longer	what	it	had	been	before	her	marriage	to	Arjuna	and	she
was	now	closer	to	her	other	brother,	Krishna.
On	 one	 such	 trip,	 Balarama	 proposed	 a	 pilgrimage	 to	 Kashi.	 Since	 everyone
lauded	the	idea	of	travelling	together,	it	was	agreed.	Under	Balarama’s	direction,
a	large	entourage	started	towards	the	ancient	city.	Jayadratha	and	Sushala	joined
them.	 They	 wished	 to	 pray	 at	 Lord	 Vishwanatha’s	 shrine,	 as	 they	 remained
childless	 after	 two	 years	 of	 marriage.	 Karna	 rushed	 back	 to	 Anga	 to	 bring	 his
family	 along.	 They	 joined	 the	 others	 at	 Kashi.	 Karna	 now	 had	 an	 infant	 son	 and
was	a	proud	father.
On	 the	 way	 to	 Kashi,	 they	 received	 another	 pleasant	 surprise.	 Vidhura	 brought
Dhritarashtra	 and	 Gandhari	 to	 join	 the	 pilgrimage.	 His	 own	 family	 also
accompanied	 him.	 It	 became	 a	 standing	 joke	 in	 the	 group	 that	 Vidhura	 had
manipulated	the	King	and	Queen	in	order	to	get	a	well-deserved	break	for	himself.
Vidhura	denied	any	such	thing	but	it	was	evident	he	was	enjoying	his	vacation.
The	 moment	 the	 Royal	 group	 entered	 the	 ancient	 city,	 news	 spread	 like	 wildfire
that	 the	 Kings	 of	 Hastinapura,	 Dwaraka,	 Anga,	 and	 Sindh,	 had	 arrived	 on	 a

pilgrimage.	 Touts	 and	 Priests	 surrounded	 them.	 These	 were	 neither	 thinkers	 nor
philosophers,	 but	 petty	 traders	 who	 sold	 their	 God	 for	 money.	 They	 stopped
Vidhura	 and	 Karna	 from	 entering	 the	 sanctum	 sanctorum,	 saying	 they	 were
Shudras.	 But	 having	 received	 their	 pieces	 of	 silver,	 they	 moved	 aside.	 They
chanted	 mantras	 without	 knowing	 what	 they	 meant	 and	 invented	 extempore
stories,	 attributing	 them	 to	 the	 Puranas	 to	 justify	 what	 they	 did.	 They	 were
obsessed	 with	 ritual	 purity	 and	 their	 own	 superiority,	 yet	 the	 city	 and	 river	 was
littered	with	filth.	They	thrived	on	death	like	vultures.	They	fattened	themselves	on
the	 guilt	 of	 those	 who	 had	 lost	 their	 loved	 ones.	 They	 threw	 half-burned	 bodies
into	 the	 Ganga	 to	 save	 firewood	 and	 maximize	 profit.	 Death	 was	 a	 thriving
industry	in	the	holiest	city	of	India.	No	enemy	of	the	country	could	have	treated	the
holy	river	worse,	even	though	its	waters	were	sacred	to	all	races	and	castes	from
the	 Himalayas	 to	 the	 southern	 seas.	 Yet	 they	 considered	 themselves	 pious	 and
treated	others	with	contempt.
The	vassal	King	of	Kashi	came	to	pay	his	respects	to	Dhritarashtra,	who	accepted
his	 invitation	 to	 stay	 at	 the	 palace.	 As	 they	 waited	 near	 the	 river,	 hundreds	 of
women	came	down	the	steps	with	oil	lamps	in	their	hands.	When	the	waters	of	the
Ganga	turned	saffron	in	the	evening	sun,	they	began	singing	hymns	that	were	as	old
as	humanity.	They	created	golden	arcs	in	the	air	as	they	moved	the	oil	lamps	in	a
circle	and	Suyodhana,	who	was	seeing	the	famed	evening	Ganga	aarti	for	the	first
time,	 stood	 spellbound.	 The	 hymns	 were	 the	 humble	 tribute	 of	 an	 ancient
civilization	to	a	great	river.	The	Ganga	flowed	silently,	caressing	the	land	with	her
holy	 waters.	 From	 the	 icy	 glaciers	 of	 Gangotri	 to	 the	 warm	 seas	 of	 Vanga,	 she
accepted	 the	 prayers	 and	 abuse	 of	 her	 children	 with	 equanimity.	 She	 took	 death
and	gave	back	life	to	India.
As	the	Royal	group	watched	mesmerised,	the	worshippers	floated	the	lamps	onto
the	water,	creating	tiny	islands	of	light	in	the	vast	darkness.
The	 last	 song	 was	 a	 prayer	 of	 thanks	 to	 all	 the	 holy	 rivers	 of	 India	 –	 Ganga,
Sindhu,	 Yamuna,	 Brahmaputra,	 Saraswati,	 Narmada	 and	 Kaveri	 –	 for	 their
munificence.	Suyodhana	wondered	how	a	culture	that	revered	rivers,	could	abuse
them	so	heartlessly.
Servants	 supplied	 oil	 lamps	 to	 the	 Royal	 group	 and	 Suyodhana	 slowly	 walked
down	the	steps	of	the	ghat	to	the	river,	trying	to	keep	the	flickering	lamp	alight	in
the	playful	breeze.	As	he	was	about	to	put	his	feet	into	the	water,	he	heard	a	soft

voice	behind	him	say,	“No,	do	not	touch	the	Holy	Mother	with	your	feet	first.	It	is
a	great	sin.”	 Suyodhana	turned	in	surprise	and	his	heart	skipped	a	 beat.	He	 was
afraid	that	if	he	did	not	avert	his	eyes	from	what	he	saw,	he	would	lose	his	heart,
yet	again.	The	wounds	Subhadra	had	inflicted	had	yet	to	heal	and	he	was	afraid	of
love.	So	he	looked	into	the	distance,	towards	the	distant	bend	in	the	river,	where	a
few	 funeral	 pyres	 were	 still	 burning.	 He	 could	 see	 a	 Priest	 gesturing	 to	 a
chandala	to	topple	a	half-burnt	corpse	into	the	river.	He	imagined	he	could	hear
the	hiss	as	it	fell	into	the	water,	disturbing	the	floating	lamps.
Without	 turning,	 Suyodhana	 said,	 “Devi,	 you	 say	 the	 river	 is	 so	 holy	 that	 one
should	 not	 put	 one’s	 feet	 into	 her	 first.	 Can	 you	 not	 see	 the	 half-burned	 corpses
floating	 in	 the	 water,	 and	 the	 filth	 and	 garbage?”	 He	 knew	 what	 he	 said	 was
provocative	 and	 hoped	 she	 would	 either	 argue	 or	 go	 away.	 He	 did	 not	 want	 to
look	into	the	depths	of	her	dark	eyes	or	see	her	lovely	lips	reflecting	the	golden
light	of	the	lamp	she	held.	He	turned	away,	not	expecting	a	reply.
When	he	heard	the	rustling	of	her	skirts,	he	turned	to	see	her	leaning	towards	the
water,	 scooping	 some	 into	 her	 cupped	 hands.	 The	 lamp	 she	 had	 floated	 swirled
away	in	circles,	starting	its	journey	towards	the	distant	sea.	Her	eyes	were	closed
in	meditation	as	the	river	water	seeped	through	her	long	fingers.	He	could	not	look
away.	Unexpectedly,	she	opened	her	eyes	and	caught	him	staring	at	her.	She	smiled
at	his	embarrassment.
He	knelt	beside	her	and	gently	placed	his	own	lamp	upon	the	water.	They	watched
it	float	away	together.	Suyodhana	asked,	“Devi,	may	I	have	the	honour	of	knowing
your	 name?”	 He	 tried	 to	 suppress	 the	 butterflies	 fluttering	 in	 his	 stomach.	 His
mouth	went	dry	when	she	did	not	respond	immediately.
Finally,	she	said,	“Bhanumati,	daughter	of	King	Bhagadatha	of	Pragjyothisha.”
“I	am	Suyodhana,	firstborn	of	King	Dhritarashtra.”
“I	know.	I	have	heard	about	you.”
“I	hope	they	were	only	good	things,”	said	Suyodhana	smiling.
“Not	always.”	A	mischievous	smile	played	on	Bhanumati’s	lips.
“Will	 you	 marry	 me?”	 asked	 the	 Prince,	 astonishing	 himself.	 He	 regretted	 the

words	as	soon	as	he	had	uttered	them.
“Is	it	not	preposterous	to	ask	me	like	this?”	Bhanumati	turned	away	her	blushing
face.
Suyodhana	 flushed	 too.	 He	 did	 not	 know	 how	 to	 handle	 the	 situation	 he	 found
himself	 in.	 ‘Was	 there	 ever	 a	 fool	 like	 me?	 What	 possessed	 me?’	 he	 wondered.
His	heart	hammered	in	his	chest.
“But	 I	 like	 preposterous	 things.	 My	 father	 is	 in	 the	 temple.”	 Hiding	 a	 smile,
Bhanumati	 lightly	 ran	 back	 up	 the	 steps	 of	 the	 ghat.	 She	 almost	 collided	 with
Vidhura,	standing	a	few	steps	above	them.	She	murmured	an	apology	and	vanished
into	the	crowd	of	her	ladies.
It	 took	 a	 while	 for	 Suyodhana	 to	 comprehend	 she	 had	 accepted	 his	 fantastic
proposal.	He	did	not	know	why	he	had	proposed	like	that	to	a	girl	he	had	just	met.
Was	his	love	for	Subhadra	so	shallow?
Vidhura	came	up	to	him	and	asked	with	a	gleam	in	his	eyes,	“Would	you	like	me	to
speak	to	her	father?”	Suyodhana	flushed	seeing	the	mischievous	smile	in	Vidhura’s
eyes.
“Please	 do	 so	 Sir,	 before	 he	 does	 something	 rash,”	 a	 voice	 cried	 out	 from	 the
darkness.
Suyodhana	wanted	to	bang	his	head	on	the	stone	steps	of	the	ghat	when	he	heard
it.	 He	 had	 completely	 forgotten	 his	 friend	 Aswathama’s	 presence.	 He	 would
certainly	 enact	 the	 whole	 scene	 to	 the	 others.	 The	 rascal	 was	 supposed	 to	 be
meditating.
Aswathama	 came	 up	 to	 them.	 “Will	 you	 marry	 me?”	 he	 said,	 imitating
Suyodhana’s	deep	 voice	 perfectly.	Suyodhana	aimed	a	 punch	 at	 the	 mischievous
Brahmin’s	face,	but	Aswathama	ducked	and	continued	in	a	feminine	voice,	“Is	it
not	preposterous	to	ask	me	like	this?	But	I	like	preposterous	things…”	Suyodhana
pounced	on	him,	stopping	him	from	saying	anything	further.	But	his	friend	slipped
from	 his	 hands	 and	 ran	 off	 shouting,	 “Karna…	 Karna…	 do	 you	 want	 to	 hear
something	preposterous?	Will	you	marry	me?”
Suyodhana	chased	after	Aswathama	as	his	friend	ducked	and	weaved	through	the

crowd.	 People	 were	 staring	 at	 them.	 Suyodhana	 knew	 they	 were	 behaving	 like
idiots.	Their	gaiety	and	laughter	was	sure	to	look	like	a	mockery	of	tradition	and
custom	to	pious	believers.	People	came	to	Kashi	from	all	over	India	to	die,	and
here	they	were	brimming	with	life	and	laughter.	It	was	not	going	to	do	his	already
stained	 reputation	 any	 good.	 But	 his	 immediate	 priority	 was	 to	 stop	 Aswathama
telling	Karna.	He	did	not	want	to	spend	the	night	as	the	subject	of	their	amusement.
“Shall	 I	 take	 it	 as	 a	 yes?”	 Vidhura	 called	 from	 the	 ghat	 to	 Suyodhana’s
disappearing	form,	but	did	not	get	a	reply.
***

They	 were	 married	 in	 the	 temple	 of	 Kashi	 Vishwanatha	 in	 a	 simple	 ceremony,
fourteen	 days	 after	 they	 had	 met.	 Karna	 fed	 the	 entire	 city	 and	 gave	 gifts	 to
everyone,	 regardless	 of	 caste,	 colour	 or	 language,	 adding	 to	 his	 reputation	 for
philanthropy.	 Suyodhana	 was	 glad	 not	 to	 have	 won	 his	 wife	 in	 a	 contest	 like	 a
trophy	or	a	prize	cow.	When	they	reached	Hastinapura,	the	Grand	Regent	invited
the	nobles	and	the	vassal	Kings	to	a	grand	celebration.	Invitations	also	went	to	the
kingdoms	of	the	Southern	Confederate.	It	was	a	State	occasion	and	the	marriage	of
the	 Crown	 Prince	 was	 celebrated	 with	 great	 pomp	 and	 splendour,	 unlike	 the
simple	 ceremony	 at	 Kashi.	 Among	 the	 people	 who	 attended	 was	 Krishna,	 who
came	to	bless	the	couple.	The	Pandavas	too,	came	to	celebrate	the	occasion	with
their	cousins.	The	two	powerful	women	of	the	Kuru	clan	stood	next	to	each	other
receiving	 their	 guests.	 Seeing	 all	 the	 Kurus	 together,	 the	 ambassadors	 of	 the
Southern	Confederate	 wondered	 whether	 the	 news	 of	 a	 schism	 in	 the	 Kuru	 clan
was	merely	an	exaggerated	tale	carried	by	their	spies	to	please	them.
“Things	 did	 not	 quite	 turn	 out	 as	 you	 wished,	 Gandhari,”	 Kunti	 whispered,	 not
letting	the	smile	leave	her	lips.
“I	 do	 not	 understand	 what	 you	 mean,	 Kunti.”	 Gandhari	 could	 sense	 the	 glee	 in
Kunti’s	words	and	prayed	Dhritarashtra	would	not	overhear	and	make	any	nasty
comments.
“We	 survived	 Varanavata,	 and	 my	 sons	 won	 the	 hand	 of	 the	 Panchala	 Princess,
despite	the	best	efforts	of	your	son.”
“Suyodhana	was	not	involved.	Why	do	you	always	suspect	him?”

“Suspect!	I	am	sure	of	it.	Ask	him	why	he	built	the	house	of	lac	for	us.	Or	was	it
your	husband	who	did	that?”
“This	 is	 a	 happy	 occasion.	 Do	 not	 ruin	 it	 with	 these	 thoughts,	 Kunti.	 Whoever
made	 the	 house	 of	 lac;	 it	 was	 a	 poor	 Nishada	 woman	 and	 her	 children	 who
perished	in	it,	not	you	or	your	sons.”
“You	would	have	preferred	it	to	be	us?”	Kunti	asked	as	she	folded	her	hands	in
welcome	to	a	minor	Prince	from	the	east	coast	of	India.
Gandhari	 did	 not	 reply.	 She	 felt	 uneasy	 about	 the	 way	 misunderstandings	 and
hatred	were	growing	within	the	family.	“We	will	talk	about	it	later,	Kunti.	Today
is	an	auspicious	day;	the	Crown	Prince	is	getting	married.”
“Crown	Prince!	Where	do	you	get	such	ideas,	Gandhari?	Yudhishtra	was	married
long	ago.”
“You	 won’t	 leave	 it	 alone	 will	 you?	 Suyodhana	 is	 the	 firstborn	 of	 the	 reigning
King.	That	is	it.”
“We	will	see	who	sits	on	the	throne	of	Hastinapura	finally,	Gandhari.	We	are	no
pushovers.”
Gandhari	turned	towards	Kunti,	a	deadly	smile	on	her	face.	“We	will	see,	Kunti.
Since	Suyodhana	is	my	legitimate	son,	he	will	rule	this	country.”
Before	Kunti	could	retort,	the	Pandavas	and	Draupadi	came.	“Seek	the	blessing	of
your	aunt	and	uncle,”	Kunti	said,	all	emotion	gone	from	her	voice.	Draupadi	and
her	 five	 husbands	 bowed	 to	 touch	 Dhritarashtra	 and	 Gandhari’s	 feet.	 Gandhari
reached	out	to	touch	Draupadi.	Her	proud	and	erect	posture	surprised	Gandhari.
There	was	nothing	bashful	about	this	young	woman,	the	Queen	thought.	What	did
she	 look	 like?	 She	 had	 heard	 Draupadi	 was	 very	 beautiful.	 But	 why	 had	 such	 a
bold	and	lovely	Princess	agreed	to	be	the	wife	of	five	men?	The	question	nagged
at	Gandhari.	Later,	she	had	the	opportunity	to	ask	the	Panchala	Princess	herself	as
they	sat	together.
“Aunt,	 you	 of	 all	 people	 should	 not	 ask	 me	 that	 question.	 Why	 did	 you	 choose
blindness	 when	 Lord	 Bhishma	 brought	 you	 here?”	 Draupadi	 said.	 “Perhaps	 my
mother-in-law	feared	her	sons	would	fight	over	me.	She	wants	them	to	be	united,”

she	added	to	diffuse	the	sharpness	of	her	earlier	remark.
“Daughter,	I	have	a	hundred	sons	but	they	do	not	need	to	marry	the	same	woman	to
remain	united.	Has	Kunti	brought	up	her	sons	with	so	little	self-control	that	they
would	fight	over	their	brother’s	wife?”	Dhritarashtra	asked,	as	he	joined	them.
Draupadi	hid	her	embarrassment	by	bowing	low	to	the	King.	Gandhari	bit	her	lip,
fearing	Kunti	would	overhear	her	husband’s	insensitive	comments.
What	she	feared	happened	within	seconds.	She	heard	Kunti’s	sharp	voice	say	to
her	daughter-in-law,	“Yudhishtra	is	looking	for	you.	What	are	you	doing	here?”
She	 heard	 Draupadi	 walking	 away.	 She	 heard	 her	 husband	 coughing	 in
embarrassment.	 The	 poor	 man	 had	 not	 known	 that	 Kunti	 was	 sitting	 nearby.
Fortunately,	for	him,	Vidhura	came	to	say	some	of	the	vassal	Kings	were	waiting
to	greet	him.	She	heard	him	walk	away,	chatting	animatedly	to	his	Prime	Minister
about	irrelevant	things	to	shut	out	any	possibility	of	Kunti	reacting	to	him.	Kunti
would	not	react	to	him,	Gandhari	knew.	She	braced	herself	for	what	was	coming.
“You	 leave	 no	 opportunity	 to	 insult	 me	 or	 my	 children,	 Gandhari,”	 Kunti	 hissed
into	the	Queen’s	ear.	Gandhari	did	not	offer	any	reply	or	apology.	She	stood	up	in
haughty	silence,	ignoring	Kunti	and	her	words.	Kunti	walked	away,	trembling	with
anger,	 leaving	 Gandhari	 to	 feel	 sad	 for	 the	 young	 girl	 who	 had	 to	 share	 her	 bed
with	five	men	so	that	her	mother-in-law	could	play	her	political	game.	‘Draupadi
is	 almost	 like	 me,’	 Gandhari	 thought.	 ‘In	 this	 country,	 every	 woman	 is	 a	 tool	 to
further	the	interests	of	men.’
***

What	Suyodhana	had	dreaded	occurred	the	morning	after	the	grand	feast.	He	came
face	 to	 face	 with	 Subhadra	 for	 the	 first	 time	 after	 her	 marriage	 to	 Arjuna.	 She
accompanied	Bhanumati.	Subhadra	carried	her	baby	son.	She	quietly	put	him	into
Suyodhana’s	arms.	As	her	fingers	brushed	 his,	 Suyodhana	 averted	 his	 eyes	 from
her	lovely	face.	The	baby	gave	a	toothless	smile	and	cooed	and	the	Crown	Prince
of	 Hastinapura	 melted.	 He	 stood	 tongue-tied	 as	 the	 baby	 played	 with	 the	 long
string	of	 pearls	 he	 was	 wearing.	 The	 woman	 he	 had	 once	 loved	 madly,	 chatted
with	 his	 newly	 wedded	 wife	 as	 though	 they	 were	 long-lost	 friends.	 How	 could
they	be	so	nonchalant?	‘Did	my	love	mean	nothing	to	Subhadra?’	he	wondered.

When	the	baby	wet	him	and	began	crying,	the	women	turned	towards	Suyodhana,
laughing.	Subhadra	took	the	baby	from	his	hands,	talking	to	it	in	the	language	only
women	and	babies	understand.	The	infant	stopped	crying	and	smiled.	“Does	he	not
look	like	his	father?”	Subhadra	asked	Suyodhana.	She	did	not	notice	the	pain	on
his	face	as	she	cooed	to	her	son.
The	 baby	 reached	 towards	 Suyodhana.	 He	 picked	 up	 the	 child	 and	 then	 took	 off
the	lustrous	string	of	pearls	from	his	neck.	Folding	it	into	four	loops,	he	placed	the
necklace	over	the	infant’s	head,	lost	in	the	innocent	smile.
Arjuna	walked	into	the	room	and	stopped,	seeing	them	all	together.	Subhadra	ran
to	her	husband.	“Suyodhana	gave	this	to	him.”	She	proudly	displayed	the	valuable
gift	Suyodhana	had	bestowed	on	their	son.
Arjuna	bent	to	touch	his	cousin	and	Bhanumati’s	feet.	After	all,	they	were	elder.
For	 a	 while,	 they	 spoke	 of	 the	 celebrations	 and	 seeing	 so	 many	 familiar	 faces.
Then,	as	Arjuna	and	his	wife	turned	to	leave,	Suyodhana	called	after	him,	“What
is	his	name,	cousin?”
But	it	was	Subhadra	who	answered.	“Abhimanyu.”
That	 night,	 as	 they	 lay	 in	 the	 massive	 four-poster	 bed,	 which	 had	 been	 a	 gift	 to
them	 from	 her	 father,	 Bhanumati	 kissed	 her	 husband’s	 lips	 and	 whispered,
“Subhadra	is	a	lucky	woman.	I	wish	I	had	a	son	like	Abhimanyu.”
Suyodhana	ran	his	fingers	through	her	hair,	not	saying	anything.	He	was	trying	hard
to	love	the	woman	he	was	holding	in	his	arms	with	the	same	passion	he	had	once
felt	for	Subhadra.
***

Meanwhile,	 on	 the	 charred	 banks	 of	 the	 Yamuna,	 where	 once	 the	 impenetrable
forests	of	Khandiva	stood,	a	great	city	was	rising.	Those	three	years	were	the	best
of	Mayasura’s	life.	He	was	a	perfectionist	and	a	tough	taskmaster.	The	surviving
Naga	women	and	children	formed	the	workforce	for	building	the	great	city.	In	the
searing	heat	of	summer,	the	pounding	rain	of	the	monsoon,	and	the	freezing	cold	of
winter,	 Mayasura	 toiled,	 along	 with	 the	 frail	 Naga	 women	 and	 their	 emaciated
children,	to	build	his	beautiful	city	for	the	Pandavas.	Just	for	food	and	a	humble
dwelling,	 the	 coolies	 worked	 to	 erect	 the	 magnificent	 palace	 where	 Yudhishtra

and	 his	 brothers	 would	 live	 and	 rule.	 Under	 the	 relentless	 drive	 of	 the	 young
Asura,	 the	 Nagas	 built	 market	 places,	 paved	 roads,	 created	 gardens,	 and	 built
homes.	Stone	by	stone,	they	created	the	greatest	city	India	had	ever	seen.	Bigger
than	Dwaraka,	more	meticulously	planned	and	executed	than	Hastinapura,	lacking
the	 urban	 chaos	 of	 Heheya	 or	 Muzaris,	 it	 was	 a	 blend	 of	 various	 styles	 of
architecture.	Mayasura	experimented	with	different	schools	and	fashioned	temples
like	 those	 of	 the	 Asuras;	 the	 musical	 halls	 with	 their	 perfect	 acoustics,	 were
derived	from	Gandharva;	the	Western	coastal	city	of	Heheya	inspired	the	markets;
the	 inns	 and	 travellers’	 rest	 houses	 resembled	 those	 in	 Muzaris,	 while	 the
sculptures	 were	 fashioned	 in	 the	 style	 of	 Gandhara.	 Mayasura	 created	 a
masterpiece	 that	 somehow	 captured	 the	 soul	 of	 India.	 Its	 fame	 spread	 far	 and
wide,	much	before	it	was	finished.
The	 Pandavas	 camped	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 Yamuna	 to	 oversee	 the	 construction.
When	they	ran	out	of	funds	for	their	luxurious	city,	they	raised	the	taxes	or	raided
the	countryside.	They	watched	the	magnificent	city	rise	with	pride	and	satisfaction
and	revelled	in	the	paeans	being	sung	in	its	praise.	The	Gods	were	kind	to	them
but	they	were	not	surprised	by	this	benevolence.	Had	they	not	always	followed	the
word	of	the	Lord	and	walked	the	path	of	dharma?	It	was	nothing	less	than	what
they	 deserved.	 As	 the	 city	 neared	 completion,	 their	 Priest	 and	 Counsellor,
Dhaumya,	arrived	from	Hastinapura	with	his	disciples,	to	ensure	Yudhishtra	kept
treading	the	path	of	righteousness.
A	few	days	after	Mayasura	had	laid	the	first	stone	for	the	new	city;	Vasuki	left	it
with	some	men	of	his	choosing.	He	did	not	try	to	dissuade	Mayasura,	for	he	knew
nothing	could	tear	the	possessed	man	from	the	city	he	was	yearning	to	build.	But
Vasuki	had	an	urgent	mission.	After	the	carnage	at	Khandiva,	Takshaka	had	tried	to
take	revenge	on	Hastinapura	by	mounting	a	series	of	terrorist	attacks.	Bhishma	had
ruthlessly	 put	 down	 the	 rebellion.	 The	 current	 whereabouts	 of	 Takshaka	 was
unknown.	 His	 hold	 on	 the	 poorer	 sections	 of	 Hastinapura	 had	 weakened
considerably	 after	 Vidhura	 had	 smashed	 Durjaya’s	 network.	 Vasuki	 felt	 uneasy
about	 their	 unethical	 liaison	 with	 elements	 like	 Durjaya.	 He	 also	 suspected	 a
ruthless	 and	 powerful	 person	 was	 manipulating	 them	 from	 the	 shadows	 and
rejoicing	 in	 the	 chaos,	 which	 ensued.	 From	 experience,	 he	 knew	 nothing	 good
could	from	this	unholy	alliance.
Vasuki	 had	 heard	 the	 rumours	 about	 General	 Hiranyadhanus	 and	 Emperor
Jarasandha’s	death.	He	had	to	find	Ekalavya	before	he	did	something	rash.	He	was

the	last	of	hope	for	his	blighted	people.	Vasuki	was	growing	old	and	his	time	was
running	out.	If	he	could	just	manage	to	make	Ekalavya	or	himself	the	leader	of	the
Nagas,	instead	of	the	arrogant	and	power	hungry	Takshaka,	perhaps	there	would
be	some	hope.	Deeply	worried,	the	old	man	left	Mayasura	and	went	in	search	of
Ekalavya.
The	 other	 old	 man	 in	 the	 gang	 chose	 to	 stay	 with	 Mayasura.	 He	 had	 nothing	 in
common	with	the	Nagas	and	his	alliance	was	due	to	the	pitiful	straits	he	had	fallen
into.	In	another	era,	he	would	have	been	sitting	on	the	throne	of	India,	lording	over
inferior	men	like	Takshaka,	or	even	Bhishma.	The	contrast	between	the	first	Indra,
who	 had	 smashed	 the	 old	 Asura	 kingdoms	 ruthlessly	 and	 established	 Deva	 rule
and	their	dynasty,	and	the	present	one	who	scurried	about	like	a	mouse,	living	on
the	tid-bits	thrown	by	men	like	Takshaka,	was	stark	and	pitiful.	In	his	youth,	Indra
had	 dreamt	 of	 regaining	 his	 empire	 but	 as	 he	 grew	 older,	 the	 dream	 turned	 sour
and	left	him	an	embittered	old	man.
The	highpoint	of	his	life	had	been	when	Kunti	had	invited	him	to	her	bed	for	a	few
weeks.	 He	 had	 left	 his	 ruined	 palace	 in	 the	 Khandiva	 forest	 and	 walked	 all	 the
way	 to	 Hastinapura.	 He	 had	 waited	 anxiously,	 like	 a	 common	 villager,	 at	 the
entrance	 of	 her	 comfortable	 dwelling	 on	 the	 outskirts	 of	 the	 forest.	 When	 she
finally	 granted	 him	 admittance,	 he	 could	 feel	 the	 cold	 contempt	 in	 her	 eyes.
Dhaumya	the	Priest	was	there	too	and	it	was	evident	it	was	he	who	had	persuaded
the	Princess	and	her	impotent	husband	to	invite	him.	As	he	bore	the	indignity	of
the	 rituals	 and	 mantras,	 he	 wondered	 about	 his	 fate.	 He	 was	 about	 to	 share	 the
bed	of	another	man’s	wife.	She	already	had	two	sons	whom	her	husband	had	not
fathered.	 Indra	 felt	 like	 a	 prize	 bull,	 brought	 in	 to	 impregnate	 the	 Royal	 womb.
Had	 he	 not	 needed	 the	 money	 desperately,	 he	 would	 have	 cursed	 them	 all	 and
stormed	out.
While	the	Priests	discussed	philosophy	outside,	he	had	fumbled	with	Kunti	inside
the	stuffy	room,	fuming	at	her	contemptuous	smile.	For	the	first	two	days,	he	had
burned	with	shame	at	his	own	impotency.	When	he	finally	succeeded	in	his	task,
he	felt	more	relief	than	pleasure.	Collecting	his	money	and	gifts,	he	had	felt	like	a
prostitute.	 He	 wondered	 about	 this	 strange	 world	 and	 its	 morality	 until	 genteel
poverty	reasserted	itself	and	blotted	out	such	meaningless	thoughts.
Indra	had	taken	shelter	in	Mayasura’s	hut	but	he	was	irritated	by	the	very	sight	of
the	dreamy	architect.	The	thought	that	the	last	Indra	owed	his	life	to	this	effeminate

Asura,	 made	 him	 bitter.	 He	 expressed	 his	 frustration	 by	 abusing	 the	 young	 man
whenever	he	got	the	chance.	Mayasura,	lost	in	his	own	dream	world,	ignored	the
rantings	 of	 the	 old	 man.	 It	 was	 easy	 to	 do	 as	 his	 work	 kept	 him	 more	 than
occupied.	He	made	sure	he	left	the	hut	before	Indra	woke	and	returned	only	after
he	 was	 asleep.	 Occasionally,	 however,	 arguments	 broke	 out	 between	 them	 and
Mayasura’s	 amused	 smile	 would	 drive	 Indra	 almost	 mad.	 During	 one	 such
argument,	Indra	blurted	out	that	Arjuna	was,	in	fact,	his	son.	Mayasura	rolled	on
the	 floor	 with	 laughter	 at	 the	 preposterous	 thought.	 Indra	 stormed	 out	 of	 the	 hut,
abusing	the	Untouchable,	and	walked	to	the	camp	of	the	Pandavas.	As	he	neared,
his	bravado	vanished.	He	stood	outside	the	camp	and	would	have	turned	back	had
the	 hawk-eyed	 Dhaumya	 not	 seen	 him.	 He	 said	 something	 to	 Krishna,	 who	 had
come	 to	 visit	 his	 friends,	 and	 before	 Indra	 knew	 it,	 all	 of	 them	 were	 walking
towards	him.
Krishna	bowed	and	smiled.	“Your	Highness,	welcome	to	the	humble	abode	of	the
Pandavas.”
Yudhishtra	then	came	forward	and	touched	his	feet.	Indra	was	taken	aback,	both	by
the	form	of	address	and	by	the	gesture	of	respect	from	the	eldest	Pandava.	It	had
been	 a	 long	 time	 since	 he	 had	 heard	 anyone	 address	 him	 as	 ‘Highness’	 and	 it
sounded	strange	to	his	ears.	He	searched	for	any	trace	of	scorn	in	their	smiles	but
they	stood	bowing	respectfully,	as	though	Indra	was	sitting	on	the	throne	of	India
as	its	rightful	Emperor.
“Here	is	your	son,	your	Highness.”	Krishna	pushed	forward	the	reluctant	Arjuna.
Indra	 was	 overwhelmed	 with	 emotion.	 Being	 introduced	 to	 his	 grown-up	 son
suddenly	 brought	 back	 all	 the	 dark	 memories.	 It	 reminded	 the	 last	 Indra	 of	 the
harsh	 reality	 –	 that	 he	 was	 a	 failure	 in	 life.	 When	 he	 lifted	 up	 his	 son,	 who	 had
stooped	 to	 touch	 his	 feet,	 he	 could	 not	 control	 himself	 and	 broke	 into	 sobs.	 The
Indra	 dynasty	 would	 not	 end	 with	 him,	 it	 would	 continue	 through	 this	 Pandava.
The	old	King	felt	his	life	finally	had	some	meaning	and	purpose.	“My	son…	my
son…”	he	kept	mumbling	through	his	tears	as	he	caressed	the	stiff	warrior.
They	showed	Indra	around	the	wonderful	city	they	were	building	and	he	felt	more
elated	with	every	passing	sight.	Krishna	asked	him	whether	he	realised	it	had	been
Arjuna	who	had	saved	his	life	by	killing	the	charging	elephant	the	day	Khandiva
burned	down.	Indra	looked	at	his	son	with	pride.	It	was	a	relief	to	know	he	was

not	 indebted	 to	 that	 Asura	 after	 all.	 It	 was	 his	 son	 who	 had	 saved	 him,	 not	 the
Untouchable.	The	hatred	he	felt	for	Mayasura	dissolved	with	that	knowledge.	He
no	 longer	 felt	 indebted.	 Instead,	 Indra	 told	 them	 about	 Mayasura’s	 many	 gifts,
heaping	praise	on	the	architect.	But	Mayasura’s	patrons,	the	Pandavas,	remained
indifferent	 to	 Indra’s	 words.	 Krishna	 smiled	 at	 the	 erstwhile	 King	 and	 said	 the
Asura	 was	 just	 doing	 his	 duty,	 there	 was	 nothing	 extraordinary	 in	 that.	 He	 too,
owed	his	life	to	Arjuna,	and	he	was	merely	repaying	his	debt.
Krishna’s	words	silenced	Indra.	He	did	not	wish	to	argue	with	the	powerful	man
and	destroy	the	happiness	he	had	finally	found.	To	change	the	subject,	he	asked	the
Pandavas	whether	they	had	thought	of	a	name	for	their	new	city
“Sir,	 the	 name	 honours	 you,”	 the	 eldest	 Pandava	 said.	 A	 smile	 broke	 the	 usual
calm	 placidity	 of	 his	 face.	 Indra’s	 heart	 skipped	 a	 beat.	 “It	 will	 be	 called…”
Yudhishtra	looked	around	at	his	beaming	brothers.	“Arjuna,	why	don’t	you	tell	His
Highness	what	has	been	decided?”
Arjuna	nodded.	“Indraprastha	–	City	of	Indra.”	He	said	it	so	quietly	that	the	others
had	to	strain	to	hear.
The	last	Indra’s	ecstasy	knew	no	bounds.	Tears	filled	his	eyes.	In	the	autumn	of	his
years,	he	finally	knew	the	Gods	had	not	forgotten	him.	The	greatest	city	of	India
would	be	named	after	him.	His	son	would	continue	his	lineage.	He	had	not	lived
in	vain.	Indra	stood	in	complete	silence.	His	joy	was	too	great	to	bear.
“We	have	named	the	city	in	honour	of	the	first	Indra,	Purendra,”	said	Krishna.
The	words	brought	the	old	man	back	to	earth	with	a	thud.	It	was	cruel	of	them	to
remind	him.	He	was	just	a	broken	old	man	who	had	only	the	glory	of	his	ancestors
to	call	his	own.	Mortification	filled	his	soul	as	he	turned	away.
“Sir,	 we	 mean	 no	 offence.	 In	 fact,	 we	 are	 all	 proud	 that	 the	 blood	 of	 the	 great
Purendra	Indra	flows	in	the	veins	of	my	brother	Arjuna,	through	you,”	Yudhishtra
said	to	Indra.
But	Indra’s	mind	had	returned	to	a	place	of	darkness.	The	new	palace	and	the	city
no	longer	looked	beautiful	in	his	eyes.	He	wanted	to	get	away	and	hide	in	his	hut.
The	bitterness	he	had	felt	towards	Mayasura,	for	being	indebted	to	him	for	his	life,

now	 turned	 towards	 Arjuna.	 ‘God	 willing,	 I	 will	 repay	 the	 debt	 to	 my	 son,’	 the
last	Indra	vowed.	He	knew	how	to	do	it.	He	had	heard	rumours	about	a	great	Suta
warrior	named	Karna,	who	was	becoming	a	threat	to	Arjuna.	He	had	heard	Karna
wore	 a	 breastplate	 that	 could	 not	 be	 penetrated	 by	 ordinary	 arrows.	 Indra	 still
remembered	 the	 secret	 formula	 used	 to	 forge	 an	 unbreakable	 iron	 arrow	 with	 a
diamond	 tip.	 It	 could	 penetrate	 anything,	 even	 the	 armour	 fashioned	 by	 the	 sunworshippers	 of	 the	 Eastern	 coast.	 The	 weapon	 had	 been	 developed	 by	 the	 first
Indra,	and	was	called	Vajra,	the	Diamond.	The	secret	had	been	passed	from	father
to	son	in	the	Indra	clan,	but	the	ironsmiths	who	could	make	it	had	long	vanished.
Perhaps	 Mayasura	 could	 reinvent	 the	 technique,	 Indra	 thought	 in	 growing
excitement.	‘I	will	bestow	the	Vajra	on	my	son,	to	take	on	the	mighty	Karna	and
thus	repay	my	debt	and	become	free.	Until	then,	I	will	not	step	into	his	palace	or
face	 him.	 The	 world	 will	 then	 know,	 the	 last	 Indra	 was	 not	 a	 complete	 failure.’
Indra	 hurriedly	 said	 his	 farewells	 to	 Krishna	 and	 the	 Pandavas.	 It	 gave	 him
pleasure	 to	 refuse	 their	 invitation	 to	 remain.	 But	 when	 Yudhishtra	 offered	 to
convey	him	to	his	door,	he	did	not	decline.	He	wanted	his	neighbours	in	the	coolie
line	to	see	him	getting	down	from	the	Royal	chariot.	But	more	than	that,	he	wanted
Mayasura	to	witness	his	triumph.
***

Mayasura	 came	 home	 early.	 He	 was	 perplexed	 to	 see	 his	 master’s	 chariot
stopping	at	his	gate	and	rushed	out	to	pay	his	respects.	He	was	shocked	to	see	old
Indra	getting	down	from	the	chariot,	wearing	a	smug	smile.	Yudhishtra	warned	the
Asura	 to	 treat	 Arjuna’s	 father	 with	 all	 due	 respect.	 He	 explained,	 that	 as	 an
ascetic,	Indra	did	not	care	for	material	comforts;	hence,	he	preferred	to	reside	in
the	hut	rather	than	in	the	palace.	The	young	architect	bowed	in	silence.
Returning	 to	 the	 Pandava	 camp	 after	 depositing	 the	 cranky	 old	 man	 at	 the
Untouchable’s	 hut,	 Yudhishtra	 shook	 his	 head	 in	 disgust.	 He	 hated	 going	 to	 the
stinking	 coolie	 colony.	 He	 would	 now	 have	 to	 take	 a	 bath.	 Nor	 did	 he	 look
forward	to	the	session	with	Guru	Dhaumya,	where	he	would	certainly	be	lectured
on	the	necessity	of	keeping	the	body	and	spirit	pure.	A	few	gifts	to	the	Brahmins
would	absolve	him	of	this	particular	sin,	but	the	palace	was	grander	than	he	had
ever	imagined	and	the	coffers	were	almost	empty.	He	would	be	forced	to	raise	the
taxes	again.

For	a	moment,	Yudhishtra	envied	his	cousin	Duryodhana,	who	had	the	courage	to
stand	up	against	the	likes	of	Dhaumya.	‘Duryodhana!	Why	does	he	always	make
me	 look	 like	 a	 weak	 fool?’	 wondered	 his	 cousin.	 The	 path	 of	 dharma	 was
difficult.	He	trod	every	step	in	fear,	lest	he	commit	a	sin	that	would	earn	him	the
wrath	 of	 the	 Brahmins	 and	 damnation	 from	 the	 Gods.	 When	 he	 was	 alone	 in	 his
chamber,	free	of	the	heavy	cloak	of	righteousness	he	painfully	wore,	he	was	afraid
to	look	in	the	mirror	and	see	himself.	His	entire	life	was	a	lie.	He	lived	in	fear.
Deep	 in	 his	 heart,	 he	 knew	 he	 had	 no	 claim	 to	 the	 throne	 of	 Hastinapura.	 He
needed	 the	 support	 of	 the	 obscure	 smritis	 and	 the	 fanciful	 interpretations	 by
amoral	scholars,	to	justify	his	claims.	But	he	had	no	choice.	He	needed	men	like
Dhaumya	as	much	as	they	needed	him.
Yudhishtra	entered	the	camp	and	went	to	take	a	bath,	ignoring	both	his	wife	and
mother.	He	could	endure	anything	but	not	Draupadi’s	scornful	smile.	His	greatest
fear	was	not	having	to	confront	Duryodhana	or	Karna	in	the	 battlefield	one	 day,
but	facing	his	wife	in	 the	 privacy	 of	 their	 chamber.	 He	 suspected	 she	 knew	 him
better	 than	 he	 knew	 himself.	 He	 was	 afraid	 she	 had	 already	 found	 the	 turbulent
darkness	that	hid	under	the	surface	of	his	vaunted	uprightness.	He	did	not	wish	to
look	into	her	lovely	eyes	and	see	his	reflection	in	those	dark	depths.
***

The	relationship	between	Indra	and	Mayasura	changed	after	that	day.	The	old	man
was	less	harsh	in	his	criticism	and	the	younger	man	showed	more	respect	to	the
deposed	 Deva	 King.	 The	 city	 project	 was	 in	 its	 final	 stages.	 More	 and	 more
people	began	arriving	from	Hastinapura	and	other	parts	of	the	country.	Mayasura
heard	 the	 complaints	 about	 the	 higher	 castes	 imposing	 restrictions	 on	 the
movements	 of	 the	 Nagas	 in	 various	 places,	 but	 obsessed	 with	 the	 completion	 of
the	temple;	he	did	not	heed	the	early	warning	signs.
Things	 soon	 turned	 for	 the	 worse.	 Returning	 from	 work	 one	 day,	 he	 found	 many
people	crowded	at	the	gates	of	the	slums.	It	was	nearly	midnight.	It	was	unusual
for	so	many	women	to	be	on	the	road	at	that	time	of	night.	Trying	to	suppress	the
nameless	fear	that	bubbled	in	his	mind,	he	walked	quickly	towards	his	hut.	A	few
men	 stared	 at	 him	 in	 accusation	 as	 he	 passed	 but	 refused	 to	 answer	 his	 frantic
questions.	Some	of	the	women	were	frantically	arranging	their	meagre	household
possessions,	 getting	 ready	 to	 move	 out.	 He	 saw	 Indra	 sitting	 dejectedly	 in	 the
veranda	and	rushed	to	him.

“The	King’s	men	have	announced	they	will	be	demolishing	this	colony.	They	have
asked	everyone	to	move	to	the	other	side	of	the	Yamuna,	to	the	place	reserved	for
Untouchables	and	low	castes.	They	want	to	create	a	public	park	here.”
Mayasura	 sat	 down	 on	 the	 mud	 steps	 of	 his	 hut	 and	 covered	 his	 face	 with	 his
calloused	hands.	He	waited	for	the	tears	to	come,	but	they	had	dried	long	ago.	He
waited	 for	 anger,	 but	 that	 too	 had	 vanished.	 When	 dawn	 began	 encroaching	 into
the	 night	 sky,	 the	 elephants	 came	 and	 began	 demolishing	 the	 huts.	 Silently,	 the
people	 walked	 towards	 the	 river	 and	 waited	 for	 the	 ferry.	 The	 city	 no	 longer
needed	them.	They	were	once	again	unwanted.	The	old	Deva	King	and	the	young
Asura	 sat	 together	 without	 exchanging	 a	 word.	 When	 the	 elephants	 came	 to
demolish	 their	 humble	 hut,	 they	 just	 stood	 up	 and	 walked	 to	 the	 edge	 of	 the
clearing,	and	watched	them	pulling	down	their	home.
Day	 broke	 with	 light	 showers	 falling	 on	 the	 desolation	 of	 the	 coolie	 camp.	 The
mahouts	 had	 taken	 the	 elephants	 away	 after	 the	 demolition	 was	 completed.	 The
place	where	the	Nagas	had	spent	three	years	was	just	a	pile	of	rubble	now.	The
alleys	that	had	buzzed	with	life	and	the	laughter	of	children	just	the	previous	night
had	 vanished	 without	 a	 trace.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 the	 Government	 had	 wiped	 out	 three
years	of	their	lives.
The	last	Indra	leaned	on	Mayasura’s	shoulder,	watching	the	frogs	jumping	in	and
out	of	the	puddles.	He	asked	in	a	soft	voice,	“Does	God	not	see	this	injustice?”
It	was	a	lament	more	than	a	question,	but	it	shook	Mayasura	from	his	stupor.	“Oh
my	 god,	 how	 could	 I	 forget?”	 he	 cried	 aloud.	 Dropping	 Indra’s	 arm,	 he	 ran
towards	the	temple,	leaving	the	old	man	perplexed.
Puffing	and	panting,	Indra	followed	the	Asura	towards	the	Royal	highway,	where
a	 grand	 procession	 inched	 along.	 Both	 sides	 of	 the	 street	 were	 decorated	 with
marigolds	and	jasmine.	The	rhythmic	chanting	of	mantras	rose	into	the	sky	along
with	the	auspicious	sound	of	conch	shells	and	brass	bells.	At	a	distance,	the	tall
spires	of	the	new	temple	sparkled	in	the	sun.	The	procession	was	more	than	a	mile
long.	 Young	 men	 and	 women	 walked	 along	 gaily.	 When	 they	 saw	 Mayasura
running	towards	the	temple,	they	were	surprised.	‘He	is	an	Untouchable.	Stop	him
before	 he	 defiles	 everything	 that	 is	 holy,’	 someone	 cried.	 The	 crowd	 parted	 in
horror	as	if	the	Asura	architect	carried	a	contagious	disease.

Mayasura	 reached	 the	 head	 of	 the	 procession	 where	 Yudhishtra	 was	 sitting	 in	 a
slowly	moving	chariot,	with	his	wife.	His	brothers	stood	behind,	proudly	viewing
the	 grand	 city	 they	 had	 created.	 Krishna	 sat	 nearby.	 The	 Asura	 ran	 beside	 the
chariot,	 screaming	 as	 loudly	 as	 he	 could.	 Yudhishtra	 ordered	 the	 driver	 to	 stop.
The	music	and	chanting	trailed	into	silence.
Dhaumya	 and	Kunti,	who	were	in	 the	chariot	behind,	got	down	to	enquire	about
the	 sudden	 halt.	 The	 Priest	 saw	 Mayasura	 standing	 near	 the	 Royal	 chariot	 and
immediately	shouted,	“Do	not	touch	and	pollute	us,	you	filthy	pig.”
Mayasura	jumped	back	in	horror.	His	courage	fled	as	words	failed	him.	He	caught
Arjuna’s	 eye	 and	 thought	 he	 saw	 a	 hint	 of	 compassion.	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 great
warrior	who	had	spared	his	life	three	years	before	and	said,	“Forgive	me,	Swami.
Their	eyes	are	closed.	Please	allow	me	to	open	them.”	He	pointed	to	the	massive
stone	 idol	 of	 Lord	 Shiva	 and	 his	 consort,	 Parvati,	 which	 he	 had	 sculpted	 in	 the
temple.	They	were	beautiful	works	of	art,	perfect	in	each	detail,	except	for	their
eyes.	It	was	as	if	the	God	and	Goddess	had	closed	their	eyes,	unable	to	bear	the
doings	of	Man.	Mayasura	walked	towards	the	idols	to	complete	his	work.
“Stop!”	Dhaumya	cried.	Two	guards	immediately	blocked	the	path	of	the	architect.
Indra	had	managed	to	reach	the	Royal	chariot	and	saw	Mayasura	trying	to	get	past
the	guards.	He	was	aghast	at	what	was	unfolding.
“Let	 me	 open	 their	 eyes…	 please	 let	 me	 open	 their	 eyes...”	 Mayasura	 cried,
struggling	to	get	to	the	holy	idols.
“Take	him	away	before	he	pollutes	anything	else,”	Dhaumya	ordered.
The	 guards	 looked	 at	 Yudhishtra	 for	 confirmation.	 He	 nodded,	 and	 they	 dragged
the	struggling	and	pleading	Mayasura	from	the	temple	he	had	toiled	three	years	to
build.	They	dragged	him	over	the	steps	he	had	so	lovingly	polished.	When	he	tried
to	grab	the	pillars	he	had	carved	with	his	own	hands,	they	kicked	them	away	so	he
would	not	defile	them.	The	temple	had	been	consecrated.	It	had	no	use	for	the	man
who	had	built	it.	The	Gods	had	gone	to	new	owners	and	people	like	Mayasura	had
no	place	in	their	abode.
“Brother,	 is	 it	 not	 inauspicious	 for	 the	 idols	 to	 be	 blind?”	 Arjuna	 asked

Yudhishtra.
“Arjuna,	once	you	grow	wiser,	you	will	understand	that	temples	are	not	required
for	 enlightened	 men.	 They	 are	 just	 props	 for	 the	 common	 people,	 steeped	 in	 the
world	of	illusion.	Do	not	worry	about	that	Asura.	You	spared	his	life	in	exchange
for	his	skills.	You	have	both	done	your	duty	and	acted	as	per	dharma.”
Arjuna	 saw	 Indra	 standing	 near	 the	 chariot.	 He	 climbed	 down	 and	 invited	 his
father	 to	 be	 his	 guest.	 Indra	 gave	 a	 derisive	 laugh	 and	 walked	 away	 without	 a
word.	 Arjuna	 watched	 him	 follow	 the	 guards	 pushing	 Mayasura.	 The	 repeated
cries	of	the	Asura,	‘Their	eyes	are	closed…	let	me	give	them	eyes…	the	Gods	are
blind…	let	me	open	their	eyes,’	created	a	strange	dread	in	his	heart.	He	could	feel
Krishna’s	 eyes	 on	 him	 and	 turned	 back.	 His	 friend	 reached	 down	 a	 hand	 to	 pull
him	into	the	chariot.	The	procession	went	on	its	way.
***

The	guards	dumped	Mayasura	on	the	riverbank.	They	proceeded	to	bathe,	to	wash
away	 the	 pollution	 caused	 by	 touching	 him.	 Indra	 sat	 down	 near	 the	 architect,
gently	touching	his	dark	head.	The	young	man	was	burning	with	fever	and	he	was
delirious.	 The	 wind	 carried	 the	 holy	 chants	 from	 the	 temple	 along	 with	 the	 faint
odour	of	camphor	and	incense.	Indra	dipped	his	uttariya	in	the	river	and	wiped
Mayasura’s	 forehead.	 A	 few	 miles	 away,	 holy	 men	 were	 inaugurating	 India’s
greatest	city,	but	the	man	whose	name	it	bore	continued	sitting	with	the	man	who
had	 built	 it.	 No	 one	 cared	 about	 either	 of	 them.	 As	 Indraprastha	 came	 officially
into	 existence	 and	 the	 Priests	 predicted	 it	 would	 one	 day	 become	 the	 capital	 of
India,	the	last	Deva	King	sat	wiping	the	forehead	of	an	Asura,	son	of	a	race	his
illustrious	 ancestor	 had	 vanquished	 long	 ago.	 Indra	 heard	 the	 dark	 waters	 of	 the
Yamuna	 gurgling	 at	 the	 irony	 of	 it	 and	 he	 laughed	 along	with	 her.	 Mayasura	 had
stopped	mumbling.	He	was	asleep	with	his	head	on	the	old	man’s	lap.	Indra	did
not	dare	move	lest	he	wake	him.	The	world	could	wait.
When	dusk	came	creeping	on	long	shadowy	limbs	and	spread	her	cloak	over	the
earth,	 Mayasura	 awoke.	 His	 hands	 involuntarily	 searched	 for	 his	 tools.	 He	 was
afraid	he	had	overslept	and	was	late	for	work.	Then	cold	reality	grabbed	hold	of
him.	He	was	no	longer	allowed	to	set	eyes	on	what	he	had	created.	He	could	no
longer	 whisper	 his	 secrets	 and	 dreams	 to	 the	 sculptures	 he	 had	 chiselled.	 He
would	never	again	caress	the	smooth	limbs	of	his	Shiva.	The	God	was	no	longer

his.	He	belonged	to	the	rich	and	privileged,	jailed	in	a	temple	with	fat	Priests	as
his	 guards.	 His	 God	 was	 blind!	 With	 a	 vehemence,	 he	 had	 never	 suspected	 he
possessed,	he	jumped	up	and	looked	at	the	distant	city,	glistening	in	all	its	glory.
He	spat	on	the	ground.	Then	the	Asura	cursed	his	creation	with	so	deep	a	hatred
that	Indra	feared	the	city	would	carry	the	curse	as	long	as	it	existed.	The	terrible
words	were	uttered	from	the	heart	of	a	man	who	had	lost	the	meaning	of	life.	With
every	sentence	he	spoke,	the	Asura	slapped	the	earth	with	both	palms.
“Blind	 Gods!	 Hear	 my	 words.	 If	 there	 is	 truth	 in	 my	 art,	 let	 what	 I	 say	 be	 true
eternally.	 The	 sweat	 and	 blood	 of	 Naga	 women	 built	 this	 city,	 but	 you	 banished
them.	 From	 today,	 may	 no	 woman	 feel	 safe	 in	 this	 city.	 May	 corrupt	 and	 evil
people	forever	rule	this	wretched	place.	May	every	man	be	possessed	with	lust	–
for	 woman,	 money,	 position,	 prestige,	 and	 power.	 May	 each	 man	 fight	 another.
May	 brothers	 butcher	 brothers	 and	 rape	 their	 own	 sisters.	 Every	 time	 a	 woman
steps	outside	her	home,	may	she	feel	the	fear	of	violation.	Let	this	be	the	asylum	of
evil	men	and	woman.	May	the	high	and	mighty	ever	fear	for	their	lives	and	live	in
self-imposed	 jails	 for	 security.	 May	 the	 ruled	 despise	 their	 rulers	 and	 may	 the
rulers	fear	the	ruled.	May	this	be	a	city	of	graveyards.	May	invaders	from	across
the	 borders	 ransack	 the	 city	 repeatedly,	 changing	 the	 roles	 of	 oppressor	 and
oppressed	 without	 end.	 May	 invaders	 plunder	 the	 city	 of	 her	 wealth	 again	 and
again.	May	this	be	a	city	without	trust,	a	city	of	anger	and	violent	passions.	May
the	blood	of	holy	men	fall	here.	May	her	citizens	pollute	this	sacred	river,	making
it	into	a	sewer.	May	the	air	be	poisonous	and	the	streets	filthy	and	crowded.	May
this	city	be	damned	forever.”
Mayasura	 broke	 into	 wrenching	 sobs.	 He	 lay	 down	 on	 the	 wet	 ground,	 grabbing
the	mud	between	his	fingers.	Much	later,	when	Indra	had	managed	to	calm	him,	the
architect	 repented	 his	 harsh	 words	 about	 the	 city	 he	 had	 built.	 Indra	 said	 curses
were	just	words.	It	was	mere	superstition	to	believe	in	them.	That	put	the	Asura’s
mind	 at	 ease.	 Indra	 spoke	 to	 him	 about	 developing	 the	 Vajra.	 Gradually,	 the
Asura’s	attention	shifted	to	what	the	Deva	King	was	saying.	He	promised	to	build
the	secret	weapon.
The	guard	who	had	gone	to	ensure	they	took	the	ferry	across	the	water,	rushed	to
report	Mayasura’s	curse	to	Yudhishtra.	Terror	gripped	his	soul.	He	did	not	wait	to
hear	about	the	plans	to	build	a	secret	weapon.	When	the	guard	finally	managed	to
get	out	his	frantic	words,	Yudhishtra’s	eyes	clouded	with	worry.

“Why	are	you	so	concerned	over	any	man’s	curse	Yudhishtra?”	Krishna	asked.	“I
promise	you	that	no	other	city	in	the	world	will	match	the	glory	of	Indraprastha.
Her	rulers	will	live	in	splendour	and	luxury.	Officials,	relatives	and	friends,	will
have	security	guards	to	protect	their	wealth,	power	and	prestige.	While	the	rulers
make	 the	 rules,	 as	 is	 their	 duty,	 they	 will	 break	 them	 when	 required,	 as	 is	 their
privilege.	The	rulers	may	be	cursed	in	private	but	in	public,	they	will	always	be
respected,	envied	and	feared.	The	Gods	will	shower	every	blessing	on	the	rulers
of	this	city.	This	is	my	promise	to	you.”
Yudhishtra	 breathed	 in	 relief	 at	 Krishna’s	 words.	 But	 Arjuna,	 with	 his	 knack	 of
asking	 uncomfortable	 questions	 at	 inappropriate	 moments,	 said,	 “You	 have	 only
spoken	 about	 the	 rulers,	 Krishna.	 What	 about	 the	 common	 man?	 Will	 the	 curse
affect	the	ruled?”
Krishna	 did	 not	 answer	 as	 he	 stood	 looking	 at	 the	 long	 queue	 of	 migrants	 at	 the
city	 gates.	 Officials	 were	 issuing	 the	 necessary	 copper	 tokens	 for	 identification.
He	saw	a	beggar	sitting	a	little	away	from	the	entrance	with	a	black	dog.	People
had	gathered	to	listen	to	his	singing.	The	breeze	carried	the	faint	notes	of	his	song
to	Krishna,	who	felt	an	irresistible	urge	to	play	an	accompaniment	to	the	melody.
He	pulled	out	his	flute	and	began	 playing	 the	 song	the	beggar	 was	 singing	in	the
street.	 Enraptured	 by	 the	 divine	 music	 they	 created	 together,	 everyone	 forgot
Arjuna’s	doubts.	Some	questions	are	better	left	unanswered.

25	RAJASUYA
THE	BREAKAWAY	LOYAL	FACTION	 of	Jarasandha’s	army,	which	was	fleeing	towards

Chedi,	met	Ekalavya	on	the	outskirts	of	Mathura.	Initially	they	took	him	to	be	just
another	Nishada	travelling	to	Magadha	in	search	of	a	position	in	the	army.	They
told	him	the	days	Nishadas	could	gain	employment	as	warriors	had	vanished	with
Krishna	 and	 his	 henchman	 killing	 King	 Jarasandha	 and	 General	 Hiranyadhanus.
Ekalavya	 was	 devastated	 to	 learn	 of	 his	 father’s	 death.	 He	 had	 been	 looking
forward	 to	 meeting	 the	 father	 he	 did	 not	 remember.	 In	 his	 mind,	 he	 had	 woven
dreams	of	being	together	with	the	man	who	had	grown	to	be	a	legend	in	his	own
lifetime.	 He	 was	 distressed	 that	 now	 he	 would	 never	 see	 his	 father	 or	 the	 great
King	Jarasandha.	The	thought	that	he	was	an	orphan,	left	to	fight	his	lonely	war	for
survival	yet	again,	made	him	feel	bitter.
Seeing	 the	 young	 man’s	 evident	 distress,	 the	 leader	 of	 the	 troop	 enquired	 of	 the
reason.	 When	 he	 learnt	 Ekalavya	 was	 General	 Hiranyadhanus’s	 son,	 a	 thrill
passed	through	the	ranks.	The	soldiers	animatedly	began	discussing	the	news.	The
leader	went	up	to	Ekalavya	once	again	and	said,	“Sir,	we	are	happy	to	meet	the
great	 General’s	 son.	 I	 am	 Shalva,	 once	 a	 vassal	 King	 of	 Jarasandha,	 and	 now
Krishna’s	 sworn	 enemy.	 Like	 you,	 we	 want	 the	 man	 dead	 at	 any	 cost.	 He	 is	 the
nemesis	 of	 our	 country.	 He	 may	 not	 be	 a	 powerful	 King,	 but	 he	 is	 an	 expert	 in
deceit	 and	 cunning.	 He	 has	 fooled	 many	 common	 people	 into	 thinking	 he	 is	 an
avatar	of	Lord	Vishnu,	come	to	earth	to	protect	dharma.	His	dharma,	that	is.	He
is	the	antithesis	of	whatever	our	King	stood	for.	The	other	man	who	claims	to	be
an	avatar	of	Lord	Vishnu,	Parashurama,	has	already	made	the	life	of	the	common
people	a	hell	in	the	kingdoms	south	of	the	Narmada	River.	Between	them,	Krishna
and	Parashurama	will	ensure	that	all	of	India	comes	under	their	sway.	We	have	to
stop	it	at	any	cost.	The	majority	of	the	Magadha	army	have	deserted	us	for	petty
rewards	and	money	and	have	chosen	to	support	the	new	King,	but	we	have	refused
to	accept	Krishna’s	puppet	as	the	King	of	Magadha.	Fortunately,	we	are	not	alone
in	 our	 war	 against	 the	 unscrupulous	 Yadava.	 There	 are	 Dhantavakra	 and
Shishupala,	 two	 powerful	 monarchs,	 who	 can	 lend	 us	 a	 hand.	 We	 are	 going	 to
Chedi	to	meet	King	Shishupala	now	and	seek	his	help.	Do	you	care	to	join	us?”

Ekalavya	looked	at	the	hundreds	of	men	eyeing	him	curiously,	trying	to	judge	what
he	was	really	like.	Ekalavya	had	planned	to	sneak	into	Indraprastha	or	Dwaraka
and	kill	the	hated	man,	but	Shalva	was	offering	him	a	better	plan.	Ekalavya	burned
with	 hatred	 against	 Krishna	 and	 his	 friend	 Arjuna.	He	would	do	anything	 to	 see
them	 dead.	 “Sir,	 I	am	 honoured	 to	 be	 a	 part	 of	 your	 army.”	 Ekalavya	 bowed	 to
Shalva	as	the	soldiers	cheered.
***

They	 raced	 to	 Chedi.	 On	 the	 way,	 Ekalavya	 learnt	 that,	 true	 to	 Jarasandha’s
principles,	 all	 the	 soldiers	 and	 captains	 were	 selected	 on	 merit	 and	 that	 no
position	 was	 inherited.	 There	 were	 Brahmins,	 Nishadas,	 Mlechas,	 Chandalas,
Asuras,	Nagas,	Vaishyas,	Kshatriyas	and	many	other	castes	in	the	army,	but	their
positions	 had	 no	 connection	 to	 caste	 hierarchy.	 There	 were	 Brahmin	 captains
reporting	 to	 Nishada	 Majors	 and	 vice	 versa.	 Shalva	 explained	 that	 in	 Magadha,
all	positions	had	been	based	on	merit	alone	and	the	selection	process	was	one	of
the	toughest	in	the	entire	country,	whether	for	Government	administrators’	posts	or
officers	in	the	army.	Ekalavya	understood	why	Jarasandha	had	been	successful	in
sacking	Mathura	seventeen	times	before	the	Yadavas	fled	to	Dwaraka.	He	had	a
professional	army	that	fought	well.
Just	before	they	entered	Chedi,	they	met	Vasuki	and	his	men.	The	old	Naga	King
told	them	of	the	carnage	Arjuna	and	Krishna	had	unleashed	in	Khandiva.	He	also
narrated	 the	 story	 of	 the	 new	 city	 they	 were	 building	 on	 the	 ashes	 of	 the	 forest.
That	 added	 fuel	 to	 the	 fire	 and	 many	 wanted	 to	 take	 on	 Arjuna	 and	 Krishna
immediately.	However,	Vasuki	advised	caution.	It	would	be	suicidal	to	take	on	a
powerful	enemy	without	proper	preparation.
When	 they	 met	 King	 Shishupala,	 he	 was	 enraged	 by	 their	 description	 of	 the
manner	in	which	Krishna	had	instigated	Bhima	to	kill	Jarasandha.	It	was	decided
to	seek	King	Dhantavakra’s	opinion	on	the	best	course	of	action.	It	took	a	month
for	Dhantavakra	to	arrive	at	Chedi.	He	was	of	the	same	opinion	as	Vasuki.	Soon,
under	Shishupala,	Dhantavakra,	Shalva,	and	Ekalavya,	the	army	began	training	and
practising	 for	 the	 big	 battle	 against	 Krishna	 and	 his	 friends.	 The	 Generals	 often
differed	 on	 strategy	 and	 there	 were	 intense	 arguments	 between	 them.	 Minor
chieftains	from	various	parts	of	the	country,	who	did	not	agree	with	Krishna	and
his	methods,	soon	began	declaring	their	allegiance	to	Shishupala.	Others	wavered,
unable	 to	 take	 a	 decision.	 The	 Priests	 created	 fear	 among	 the	 petty	 nobility	 by

talking	about	Krishna’s	divinity.	Among	the	common	people,	a	cult	of	worshipping
him	as	an	avatar	of	Lord	Vishnu,	was	taking	root.
When	 the	 invitation	 to	 Yudhishtra’s	 rajasuya	 arrived,	 Krishna’s	 enemies	 were
still	 undecided	 on	 how	 to	 take	 him	 and	 the	 Pandavas	 on.	 By	 conducting	 a
rajasuya,	Yudhishtra	was	challenging	them	to	either	accept	his	suzerainty	or	fight
him.	 Vasuki	 warned	 them	against	 accepting	 Yudhishtra’s	 invitation,	 suspecting	 a
trap.	But	no	self-respecting	King	could	walk	away	from	such	an	open	challenge.
Shishupala	 decided	to	 take	 Ekalavya	 to	 Indraprastha	 with	 him,	 leaving	 the	 other
two	on	standby	on	the	outskirts	of	the	city	with	their	armies.	His	decision	to	take
Ekalavya	to	Yudhishtra’s	court	was	deliberate	and	provocative.	He	wished	to	see
how	 the	 orthodox	 Priests	 and	 the	 Pandavas	 would	 react	 to	 the	 presence	 of	 a
Nishada	in	the	august	assembly.
***

The	 year	 before,	 Bhanumati	 had	 given	 birth	 to	 twins,	 a	 son	 and	 a	 daughter.	 She
soon	discovered	Suyodhana	was	a	doting	father.	She	often	found	him	playing	with
the	 infants	 or	 watching	 them	 contentedly	 while	 they	 slept.	 Whenever	 Subhadra
visited,	 she	 brought	 her	 son	 Abhimanyu	 with	 her,	 and	 the	 little	 boy	 developed	 a
deep	bond	with	his	uncle.	He	often	sat	near	Suyodhana,	observing	the	twins	lying
on	 their	 father’s	 lap.	 Abhimanyu	 asked	 his	 uncle	 why	 he	 had	 named	 the	 boy
Lakshmanakumara	and	the	girl	Lakshmana,	but	Suyodhana	never	gave	him	a	clear
answer.	Every	time	he	invented	a	new	story	for	the	similar	names	and	invariably
those	stories	involved	ghouls,	spirits,	angels,	gandharvas	and	animals.	Bhanumati
loved	seeing	her	growing	twins	smile	at	Suyodhana	and	try	to	follow	Abhimanyu
with	their	tottering	steps.
Bhanumati	developed	a	deep	friendship	with	Subhadra,	despite	knowing	she	had
been	 Suyodhana’s	 first	 love.	 She	 trusted	 her	 husband	 completely	 and	 knew	 he
would	never	stray.	He	was	so	unlike	the	other	Princes	and	Kings	she	knew,	who
competed	 with	 each	 other	 in	 filling	 their	 harem	 with	 gorgeous	 girls.	 Suyodhana
was	 the	 butt	 of	 jokes	 for	 remaining	 faithful	 to	 his	 wife	 in	 a	 culture	 that	 adored
Krishna	for	his	harem	of	16,008	‘wives’.	Bhanumati	cherished	the	serene	quality
of	their	marital	relationship.	She	shared	Suyodhana’s	love	for	nature,	the	arts,	and
music;	she	loved	him	for	his	kindness	towards	common	people,	as	well	as	for	his
arrogance	 towards	 those	 whom	 he	 despised,	 and	 his	 blunt	 way	 of	 speaking	 the
truth.	She	loved	him	for	his	skill	with	the	mace	and	for	his	pride	and	honesty.	She

loved	him	in	a	thousand	ways,	but	more	than	anything,	she	loved	him	for	the	deep
trust	he	had	in	his	friends.
Bhanumati	suspected	Suyodhana	loved	his	friends	more	than	they	loved	him	back.
He	was	the	Crown	Prince	and	he	would	inherit	a	vast	kingdom.	He	had	nothing	to
gain	by	befriending	a	chariot	driver	or	a	poor	Brahmin,	whereas	they	stood	to	gain
much.	 Yet	 nobody	 could	 have	 been	 more	 loyal	 than	 Suyodhana	 towards	 them.
Bhanumati	 adored	 him	 for	 his	 courage	 and	 conviction	 in	 making	 Karna	 a	 vassal
King,	despite	his	lineage;	yet	a	seed	of	jealousy	started	sprouting	in	her	mind.	She
respected	Karna	for	his	achievement	in	becoming	the	most	credible	challenger	to
Prince	Arjuna	in	archery.	It	was	a	remarkable	feat	for	someone	born	a	poor	Suta.
She	had	no	doubt	that	Karna	was	noble	at	heart	and	her	husband’s	faithful	friend.
His	charitable	actions	were	spreading	his	fame	throughout	 India.	Yet,	Bhanumati
harboured	 the	 niggling	 doubt	 that	 whereas	 her	 husband	 would	 not	 hesitate	 in
choosing	the	welfare	of	his	friends	over	glory,	Karna	would	take	glory	and	fame
over	friendship	if	such	a	choice	ever	arose.	Perhaps	it	had	something	to	do	with
an	incident	that	happened	early	in	their	marriage.
Bhanumati,	pregnant	with	the	twins,	was	experiencing	a	bout	of	mild	depression
when	Karna	dropped	in	unexpectedly.	She	invited	him	to	join	her	at	a	board	game
while	 he	 waited	for	 Suyodhana	 to	return	 from	a	meeting	with	the	Grand	Regent.
Karna	 happily	 obliged.	 Thinking	 he	 would	 be	 a	 pushover,	 considering	 his
childhood	as	a	Suta,	she	was	surprised	see	how	well	he	played	a	game	that	was
the	 preserve	 of	 Princes	 and	 Kings.	 She	 soon	 saw	 he	 was	 as	 formidable	 an
opponent	in	the	game	as	he	was	in	battle.	Bhanumati	hated	losing.	With	a	playful
and	naughty	smile	aimed	at	distracting	Karna,	she	stole	one	of	his	winning	pieces.
He	smiled	back	at	her	and	asked	her	to	put	it	back.	She	became	angry	that	he	had
caught	her,	and	pouted,	pushing	the	board	away	and	trying	to	leave	the	game.
Karna	 also	 played	 to	 win.	 In	 the	 heat	 of	 the	 moment,	 he	 grabbed	 her	 wrist	 and
pushed	her	back	into	her	seat.	She	wriggled	away	from	his	grasp	and	tried	running
from	 the	 room.	 He	 jumped	 up	 and	 grabbed	 her	 by	 her	 waist.	 At	 that	 moment,
Suyodhana	arrived.	For	a	few	seconds,	they	stood	in	a	frozen	tableau,	the	Prince
gazing	at	his	wife	being	handled	by	his	best	friend.	Bhanumati	recovered	first	and
tried	to	free	herself	from	Karna.	But	his	strong	hands	did	not	release	their	vicelike	grip	on	her	still	slim	waist.	She	tried	pushing	him	away.	Suddenly,	he	freed
her.	 The	 string	 of	 pearls	 she	 was	 wearing	 at	 her	 waist	 broke	 and	 hundreds	 of
pearls	began	bouncing	around	them,	accentuating	the	silence	in	the	room.

“Do	you	want	me	to	find	these	pearls	alone	or	will	you	come	out	of	your	daze	and
give	 me	 a	 helping	 hand?”	 Suyodhana	 asked	 his	 friend	 and	 wife	 with	 an	 amused
smile,	 as	 he	 knelt	 to	 catch	 the	 pearls	 running	 away	 from	 them	 to	 hide	 under	 the
furniture.	Bhanumati	sat	down	on	the	bed,	covered	her	face	with	her	long	fingers,
and	broke	into	sobs.	Karna	knelt	to	help	his	friend	gather	the	pearls.
“What	 is	 this?	 Are	 you	 two	 so	 drunk	 that	 you	 are	 crawling	 on	 the
floor?”Aswathama	 came	 into	 the	 room	 and	 as	 usual,	 made	 them	 laugh.	 He	 too
joined	in	the	pearl	fishing.	Soon	the	three	friends	left	the	room,	having	put	back	the
string	 of	 pearls	 they	 had	 carefully	 threaded.	 When	 their	 laughter	 faded	 away,
Bhanumati	slowly	stood	up.	She	was	afraid	Suyodhana	would	take	up	the	matter
when	they	were	alone.	She	spent	the	whole	day	worrying	about	her	future.	When
he	 was	 late	 in	 reaching	 their	 chamber	 that	 night,	 she	 fretted,	 thinking	 he	 was
punishing	her	for	her	indiscretion.	When	he	finally	arrived,	he	quietly	kissed	her
on	the	lips	and	lay	down	on	the	bed	without	saying	a	word.	Fearfully,	Bhanumati
put	her	hands	on	his	broad	chest.	She	could	feel	his	breathing	change.	She	wished
he	 would	 say	 something	 about	 the	 incident	 that	 morning	 and	 was	 even	 ready	 for
his	abuse.	But	Suyodhana	quietly	caressed	her	hair	in	silence.	When	she	thought
she	would	burst,	she	said	to	him	softly,	“It	was	not	what	you	may	suspect…”	She
stopped	in	mid-sentence,	realizing	the	oddness	of	her	statement.
“There	was	nothing	to	suspect,”	he	whispered	into	her	ear	and	her	heart	leapt	with
joy.	She	kissed	him	passionately.	When	she	pulled	away	to	get	her	breath	back,	he
said	 something	 she	 would	 never	 forget	 until	 the	 day	 she	 died.	 “I	 have	 complete
faith	in	Karna.	He	would	never	do	anything	dishonourable.”
Bhanumati	 went	 stiff	 when	 she	 heard	 it.	 She	 wished	 he	 had	 not	 spoken	 those
words.	It	meant	he	trusted	Karna	more	than	he	did	her.	The	flame	of	passion	that
was	 rising	 between	 them	 died	 away.	 Suyodhana	 sensed	 it	 in	 the	 coldness	 of	 her
movements.	 He	 tried	 to	 make	 amends	 by	 whispering	 his	 love	 for	 her,	 but	 the
damage	was	done.	Later,	while	he	slept,	she	lay	looking	at	his	face	for	a	long	time,
wondering	whether	he	was	doing	the	right	thing	by	trusting	his	friends	so	naively.
She	 put	 her	 arms	 around	 him	 protectively.	 Moonlight	 peeping	 in	 through	 the
window	 lit	 his	 handsome	 face	 as	 he	 smiled	 in	 his	 sleep.	 Bhanumati’s	 heart
dissolved	 in	 love.	 She	 hugged	 him	 close,	 trying	 hard	 to	 suppress	 the	 fearful
premonitions	that	filled	her	mind.

When	the	invitation	for	the	rajasuya	arrived,	Bhanumati	did	not	want	Suyodhana
to	go.	She	feared	Krishna	and	Yudhishtra.	She	was	sure	they	would	lay	a	trap	for
her	husband.	She	tried	to	dissuade	him.	But	he	said	he	did	not	have	a	choice	as	the
Crown	Prince	of	Hastinapura.	Karna	came	to	Hastinapura,	eager	to	go.	Jayadratha
came	 from	 Sindh.	 He	 was	 of	 the	 opinion	 that	 Suyodhana	 should	 go.	 Only
Aswathama	sided	with	Bhanumati,	arguing	that	the	rajasuya	yajna	was	a	trap	and
it	 was	 better	 to	 ignore	 it.	 Finally,	 Uncle	 Shakuni	 persuaded	 Suyodhana	 to	 go,
arguing	 that	 it	 would	 be	 cowardly	 not	 to	 accept	 the	 invitation	 and	 would	 be
conduct	unbefitting	a	Kshatriya.	How	Bhanumati	hated	that	Gandhara	Prince!	But
left	with	no	option,	she	accompanied	them	to	the	temple	at	the	Ganga	ghat,	from
where	they	would	leave	for	Indraprastha.
When	they	emerged	from	the	temple,	Kripa	was	sitting	in	his	usual	place	under	the
Banyan	tree.	Suyodhana	went	up	to	him	to	seek	his	blessings.	As	the	Prince	turned
to	leave,	Kripa	said,	“Suyodhana,	do	not	get	provoked	at	any	cost.”
Shakuni	 sniggered.	 Suyodhana	 hesitated	 a	 moment.	 Bhanumati	 shuddered	 at	 the
words.	 They	 echoed	 her	 own	 fears	 and	 she	 tightened	 her	 grip	 on	 her	 husband’s
arm.	Thousands	of	people	had	gathered	to	see	their	Prince	leave	for	Indraprastha.
As	they	hailed	him,	he	gently	loosened	his	wife’s	grip	and	smiled	at	her.	Then	he
said	goodbye	to	the	twins	and	the	procession	started	towards	the	Pandava	capital.
Aswathama	 looked	 back	 and	 met	 Bhanumati’s	 eyes.	 He	 nodded,	 gesturing	 he
would	be	there	with	his	friend.	She	walked	back	slowly	to	the	waiting	palanquin
with	 her	 twins	 and	 collapsed	 into	 its	 soft	 luxury.	 She	 tried	 playing	 with	 the
children	to	forget	the	fear	that	tugged	at	her	heart.	Kripa’s	words	of	warning	kept
returning	 like	 a	 bad	 rash.	 She	 thought	 she	 could	 hear	 the	 distant	 rumblings	 of	 a
bloody	battle	and	hugged	her	children	in	fear.
***

The	 Brahmins	 were	 furious	 about	 the	 hideous	 looking	 beggar	 and	 his	 blind	 dog.
How	dared	he	defile	the	holy	place	of	yajna	with	 his	presence,	they	asked	each
other?	Yudhishtra	stirred	uneasily.	He	had	just	completed	gifting	immense	wealth,
clothing,	and	cows	to	the	Brahmins	and	had	been	basking	in	their	praises	when	the
ugly	 Untouchable	 entered	 the	 holy	 venue	 and	 began	 singing.	 Yudhishtra	 would
have	 ordered	 his	 death,	 but	 the	 beggar	 was	 singing	 about	 the	 love	 of	 his	 God
Krishna.	 Except	 for	 the	 Priests	 around	 Dhaumya,	 the	 others	 stood	 around

enthralled.	Yudhishtra	wished	Krishna	and	Arjuna	would	arrive	before	he	had	to
take	 a	 decision.	 The	 Priests	 with	 Dhaumya	 started	 shouting	 to	 him	 to	 throw	 the
unclean	man	out,	or	better	still,	kill	him.	Yudhishtra	looked	at	the	beggar	who	was
dark	on	one	side	and	a	dirty	golden	on	the	other.	With	his	protruding	teeth	and	burn
marks,	he	looked	like	a	mongoose.	The	mangy	dog	with	him	kept	wagging	its	tail
in	time	to	the	beggar’s	rapturous	song.
A	sudden	roar	from	Dhaumya	made	Yudhishtra	stand	up.	“Your	Highness,	kill	this
rascal!	Can	you	not	hear	what	he	is	singing?”
Yudhishtra	listened	more	intently	to	the	beggar’s	song	and	the	colour	drained	from
his	 face.	 The	 song	 insulted	 him,	 the	 learned	 Priests,	 and	 even	 the	 Vedas	 that
sanctioned	 the	 great	 sacrifice	 he	 was	 conducting.	 The	 beggar	 sang	 that	 learning
was	useless	if	there	was	no	love;	that	sacrifices	were	meaningless	without	purity
of	 heart;	 and	 gifts	 worthless	 if	 bestowed	 on	 the	 undeserving.	 He	 sang	 that	 this
rajasuya	sacrifice	was	a	charade	to	gain	fame	and	not	a	sacrifice	at	all;	that	real
sacrifices	happen	unknown	and	unheard,	by	people	expecting	nothing	in	return	–
neither	 fame,	 nor	 wealth,	 heaven	 nor	 salvation.	 Those	 sacrifices	 had	 God’s
blessings.
Yudhishtra	trembled	in	anger.	The	audacity	of	the	Untouchable	not	only	to	pollute
the	yajna	venue	but	also	to	insult	the	King	and	the	learned	Brahmins,	enraged	him.
“Arrest	him!”	he	commanded.	Soldiers	rushed	towards	the	beggar.
“What	has	happened,	brother?	Why	has	the	singing	stopped?	I	came	to	listen.	That
man	 has	 magic	 in	 his	 voice.”	 Yudhishtra	 turned	 at	 the	 question	 and	 saw	 Arjuna.
Draupadi	suppressed	a	giggle	from	behind	him.	Yudhishtra	turned	towards	her	in
irritation.	 “He	 was	 insulting	 all	 that	 we	 hold	 sacred	 and	 you	 are	 laughing?”	 he
asked	angrily.
“No	normal	person	would	dare	come	here	and	insult	you.	Either	he	is	mad	or	a
saint.	 Why	 don’t	 we	 ask	 him	 why	 he	 was	 singing	 what	 he	 was?”	 Arjuna	 said,
trying	to	pacify	his	enraged	brother.
Draupadi	looked	at	Arjuna	and	smiled	in	approval.	Yudhishtra	raised	his	hand	and
ordered,	“Free	him.	Let	us	hear	what	he	has	to	say.”
The	 soldiers	 jumped	 back,	 relieved	 that	 the	 command	 had	 come	 before	 they

touched	 the	 beggar	 and	 polluted	 themselves.	 A	 susurrus	 of	 ‘Sin…	 sin…’	 came
from	the	ranks	of	the	Priests.	The	beggar	looked	around.	When	he	understood	no
one	 was	 going	 to	 arrest	 him,	 he	 resumed	 his	 song.	 This	 time	 he	 sang	 about	 the
night	he	had	entered	a	poor	Brahmin’s	hut	with	the	intention	of	robbing	him;	what
he	had	seen	there,	and	how	the	Brahmin	had	sacrificed	his	family,	home,	and	life,
so	 a	 poor	 Untouchable	 like	 him	 could	 eat.	 The	 sacrifice	 of	 a	 man,	 who	 had
nothing,	for	a	man	who	was	nothing,	was	a	real	sacrifice.	Such	places	were	holy,
not	this	place	of	rajasuya,	where	greed	and	avarice	ruled.	The	hut	was	where	his
Krishna	 resided;	 and	 only	 the	 pure	 of	 heart	 could	 hear	 the	 divine	 music	 of	 His
flute.	 Finally,	 he	 said,	 “To	 hear	 that	 music	 oh	 King,	 silence	 the	 croaking	 of	 the
Priests;	burn	their	smritis;	and	free	yourself	from	the	tangle	of	meaningless	rituals
and	tradition.”
There	was	uproar	from	Dhaumya	and	his	Priests.
Draupadi	asked,	“Who	are	you?”
“I	am	nobody,”	the	beggar	replied.	“But	I	visit	everyone	whether	they	like	me	or
not.	I	am	Jara,	and	this	is	my	dog.	It	reminds	me	to	feel	grateful	for	my	life	and	its
blessings.	We	live	in	the	streets,	chased	away	from	the	temples	and	mansions,	yet
we	live	happily	and	rejoice	in	the	blessing	called	Life.	We	lack	nothing	and	thank
God	every	day	for	His	grace.”
Arjuna	 became	 uneasy.	 Memories	 of	 the	 day	 he	 had	 blinded	 a	 puppy	 with	 his
arrow	came	rushing	back.	Moreover,	the	image	of	the	severed	thumb	of	a	Nishada
lying	in	the	mud	while	Guru	Drona	stood	with	an	impassive	face,	clawed	furrows
in	his	conscience.	He	had	an	irrational	urge	to	know	the	name	of	the	dog	he	had
blinded	and	asked,	“What	is	your	dog	called?”
Jara	looked	at	the	furious	faces	of	the	Priests.	His	eyes	met	those	of	Dhaumya.	The
Chief	Priest	looked	away,	as	if	afraid	of	the	Untouchable’s	eyes.	“Dharma,”	Jara
said	and	the	blind	dog	wagged	its	tail.
There	 was	 a	 stunned	 silence	 before	 the	 Priests	 erupted	 in	 anger.	 ‘Sin…	 sin…
calling	a	dog	Dharma!	He	is	insulting	our	religion	and	Holy	Scriptures.	Kill	him!
Kill	him!’	they	screamed,	falling	silent	only	when	Yudhishtra	took	his	sword	from
its	sheath.

“Let	him	be.	He	is	a	saint,”	Draupadi	said,	holding	onto	her	husband’s	hand.
Seeing	Yudhishtra	hesitate,	Dhaumya	yelled	out	in	an	authoritative	voice,	“Do	not
stop	a	King	from	doing	his	dharma.	Nothing	can	be	a	greater	sin	and	you	will	pay
for	it.”
Yudhishtra	looked	into	Draupadi’s	eyes.	All	his	fears	came	rushing	back.	He	felt
naked	before	her	gaze	and	his	sword	fell	to	the	ground.
Fearing	 the	 arrogant	 beggar	 would	 walk	 away	 free,	 Dhaumya	 shouted,
“Yudhishtra,	you	have	forsaken	 your	dharma	and	 the	 same	 dharma	will	 forsake
you.	You	will	pay	for	it.	You	have	allowed	an	Untouchable	to	insult	Brahmins	and
the	Vedas.”
Krishna,	 walking	 into	 the	 commotion,	 saved	 Yudhishtra	 any	 further	 insult.	 Jara
saw	his	living	God	standing	before	him,	and	rushed	forward,	sobbing	in	joy	and
ecstasy.	 Dharma	 followed	 him.	 However,	 a	 huge	 crowd	 of	 Priests	 mobbed
Krishna,	complaining	about	the	way	Yudhishtra	and	his	wife	were	treating	them.
Krishna	 smiled	 at	 them	 and	 said	 it	 was	 good	 to	 listen	 to	 new	 ideas	 once	 in	 a
while.	Yudhishtra	was	relieved	that	Krishna	took	the	incident	lightly	and	did	not
censure	him.	But	Dhaumya	looked	peeved.
Jara	 waited,	 but	 the	 crowd	 around	 Krishna	 kept	 thickening.	 “He	 has	 become	 a
prisoner	 of	 the	 Priests,”	 Jara	 said	 to	 Dharma.	 The	 dog	 licked	 his	 hand.	 Jara
slowly	 walked	 away.	 As	 he	 was	 turning	 into	 a	 side	 street,	 a	 troop	 of	 cavalry
galloped	 by.	 It	 was	 Ekalavya	 and	 Shishupala,	 rushing	 towards	 Yudhishtra’s
rajasuya.
When	Shishupala	and	Ekalavya	entered	the	venue,	the	commotion	created	by	Jara
had	died	down.	Shishupala	boldly	walked	to	the	seat	nearest	the	sacrificial	altar
and	invited	Ekalavya	to	sit	beside	him.	Angry	murmurs	rose	from	the	crowd	at	this
provocative	act.	The	King	of	Chedi	was	throwing	an	open	challenge	to	Yudhishtra
and	the	Priests	by	having	a	Nishada	sit	so	close	to	the	holy	altar.	Yudhishtra	rose,
but	Krishna	restrained	him.	The	ceremony	resumed.
Shishupala	 and	 Ekalavya	 watched	 the	 proceedings	 with	 unconcealed	 hostility.
When	Dhaumya	announced	Krishna	as	the	Guest	of	Honour,	there	was	a	splattering
of	polite	applause.	Murmurings	arose	from	the	assembled	Kings	and	Princes	but

the	Yadava	walked	with	confident	steps	to	the	special	seat	reserved	for	him.
”Stop!”	Shishupala	was	standing	with	his	sword	drawn,	every	eye	upon	him.
He	 turned	 to	 the	 assembled	 Kings	 and	 noblemen	 of	 India	 and	 addressed	 them.
“Respected	Kings,	this	is	a	great	insult	to	us.	The	King	of	Indraprastha	has	chosen
a	 common	 cowherd	 over	 a	 Kshatriya	 as	 his	 Chief	 Guest.	 What	 is	 it	 that	 he	 has
done	to	deserve	this	honour?	He	is	a	thief	and	a	scoundrel.	We	have	heard	enough
stories	about	this	cowherd	and	none	can	be	repeated	in	decent	company.	Is	there
any	crime	he	has	not	committed?	We	have	lost	count	of	the	number	of	people	he
has	murdered	on	the	sly.	He	never	fights	like	a	man.	He	killed	his	uncle	by	deceit;
he	has	come	here	after	murdering	one	of	the	greatest	Kings	our	land	has	ever	seen.
He	 was	 afraid	 of	 Jarasandha,	 knowing	 he	 was	 no	 match	 for	 the	 great	 man.	 He
trapped	him	and	used	Bhima	to	get	rid	of	his	enemy	–	an	enemy	who	had	defeated
him	 seventeen	 times.	 He	 arranged	 for	 the	 murder	 of	 General	 Hiranyadhanus,	 the
father	of	this	young	man	sitting	here.”	Shishupala	paused	to	gauge	the	reaction	of
the	crowd.
The	Priests	were	shouting,	but	he	knew	that	he	held	the	attention	of	the	Kings	and
Princes.	 Confident	 of	 his	 audience,	 the	 King	 of	 Chedi	 pressed	 on.	 “Why	 should
this	man	be	given	the	honour	of	being	Chief	Guest?	King	Yudhishtra,	if	you	wish	to
honour	a	man	for	his	steadfastness	in	dharma,	chose	the	great	Bhishma	instead.	If
you	 want	 a	 great	 warrior,	 chose	 Drona.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 elect	 a	 man	 of	 wisdom,
choose	Vidhura.	And	if	you	want	a	man	of	compassion	and	righteousness,	chose
your	 cousin	 Suyodhana.	 If	 you	 want	 a	 man	 of	 intellect,	 choose	 Kripa;	 or	 if	 you
want	a	man	of	reason,	choose	Carvaka.	If	you	want	a	 man	of	unflinching	loyalty,
chose	Aswathama.	If	you	want	to	honour	a	man	who	has	struggled	against	the	odds
and	emerged	victorious,	it	will	be	a	difficult	choice	for	you,	for	both	Karna,	the
large-hearted	 King	 of	 Anga,	 and	 this	 brave	 young	 man,	 Ekalavya,	 fit	 that
description.	If	you	want	a	man	who	transcends	all	these	qualities,	choose	the	sage
Veda	Vyasa.	But	for	the	sake	of	humanity,	do	not	choose	the	icon	of	adharma.”
Krishna	walked	towards	Shishupala	and	bowed	to	him	reverently.	“May	I	know
why	 you	 call	 me	 amoral,	 Your	 Highness?”	 he	 asked,	 the	 mocking	 smile	 never
leaving	his	lips.
Ekalavya	tensed	in	his	chair	but	Shishupala	gazed	straight	into	the	eyes	of	his	foe.
They	stared	at	each	other	for	a	moment	before	Shishupala	turned	to	the	assembly

and	 said	 in	 a	 clear	 voice,	 “I	 am	 reluctant	 to	 speak	 of	 the	 exploits	 of	 our	 Chief
Guest	in	this	august	company	of	Kings,	but	he	leaves	me	no	choice.	Please	forgive
my	harsh	words	but	this	is	the	most	dangerous	man	to	have	walked	our	land.	He	is
leading	 us	 along	 the	 path	 to	 disaster	 and	 war.	 He	 wishes	 to	 preserve	 a	 social
order	that	grants	privileges	to	a	few	and	hell	to	the	rest.	No	wonder	people	like
Dhaumya	 support	 his	 claim	 of	 being	 an	 avatar	 of	 Vishnu.	 The	 Priests	 actively
propagate	 his	 divinity,	 for	 they	 will	 be	 the	 benefactors	 of	 his	 philosophy.
Unfortunately,	the	poor	have	begun	believing	it.
“What	 are	 these	 divine	 acts?	 His	 trail	 of	 murders	 began	 at	 the	 age	 of	 eight.	 He
stole	from	the	cowherds	he	lived	among,	in	his	village.	He	drove	away	Nagas	like
Kaliya,	 and	 took	 away	 their	 land.	 He	 murdered	 his	 uncle.	 He	 has	 even	 stolen
women’s	 clothing	 while	they	 were	 bathing	 and	 then	 paraded	 them	 naked	 before
him.	 He	 jilted	 his	 lover,	 Radha,	 when	 he	 ran	 away	 to	 Dwaraka,	 for	 fear	 of
Jarasandha.	Wise	men	thought	he	would	mellow	with	age.	But	he	has	no	morality.
He	keeps	a	harem	of	16,008	girls	but	Radha	has	no	place	in	it.	Yet	he	claims	he	is
an	avatar	of	Vishnu.	He	wishes	to	share	the	mantle	of	none	other	than	Lord	Rama,
who	was	steadfast	in	his	love	towards	his	wife	Sita,	and	who	fought	a	war	with
the	demon	King	Ravana	for	her	sake.	Can	there	be	a	greater	irony?”
“Noooo…!”	 Ekalavya	 screamed	 as	 he	 saw	 King	 Shishupala	 collapse	 onto	 the
ground,	blood	spurting	from	his	throat.	The	King	of	Chedi	went	into	death	spasms.
Krishna	picked	up	his	chakra,	a	small	disc	with	very	sharp	edges,	from	the	throat
of	his	enemy	and	wiped	off	the	blood.
‘It	 is	 cold	 blooded	 murder,’	 someone	 shouted.	 A	 few	 Kings	 rushed	 to	 attack
Krishna	with	their	swords	drawn.	The	Pandavas	sprang	up	to	defend	their	friend
and	 guide.	 The	 rajasuya	 venue	 turned	 into	 a	 battleground.	 Ekalavya’s	 first
reaction	was	to	fight	Shishupala’s	murderer,	but	prudence	overcame	instinct.	He
knew	Krishna’s	supporters	outnumbered	those	of	the	slain	King.	Krishna	and	the
Pandavas	were	cutting	down	their	detractors	mercilessly.	Shalva	and	Dhantavakra
were	waiting	with	an	army	on	the	outskirts	of	Indraprastha.	If	he	could	reach	them
somehow,	he	could	turn	the	tables.	Ekalavya	ran	from	the	venue,	cutting	down	the
soldiers	who	tried	to	stop	him,	without	breaking	stride.	More	and	more	soldiers
were	 rushing	 to	 join	 the	 fight.	 The	 Brahmins	 were	 quietly	 slipping	 away	 as
Ekalavya	mounted	his	horse	and	galloped	towards	his	friends	through	the	streets
of	 Indraprastha,	 cleaving	through	the	 sea	 of	 people	 running	 about	 like	 panicked

chickens.	 He	 kicked	 a	 beggar	 out	 of	 his	 way	 and	 saw	 him	 lurch	 and	 fall,	 face
down	 on	 the	 pavement.	 An	 angry	 dog	 chased	 his	 horse	 for	 a	 while	 but	 then
returned	 to	 its	 master,	 who	 was	 writhing	 in	 pain.	 Ekalavya	 cursed	 them	 both
silently	as	he	sped	through	the	dusty	streets	of	the	great	city.	How	he	hated	the	lazy
men	who	stood	in	the	way	of	others.
When	he	reached	 Dhantavakra	 and	 Shalva,	 he	 was	 panting	 with	 excitement	 and
anger.	Somehow,	he	managed	to	tell	them	Krishna	had	murdered	Shishupala	and
they	 had	 to	 take	 revenge.	 His	 furious	 friends	 cursed	 the	 Yadava.	 They	 ordered
their	army	to	race	into	the	city.	But	as	the	ranks	lurched	forward,	Vasuki	stood	in
their	 way.	 The	 old	 Naga	 leader	 raised	 his	 staff	 and	 ordered	 everyone	 to	 calm
down.	The	column	stopped	in	confusion,	the	horses	neighing	in	fright	and	irritation
at	the	sharply	pulled	reins.
“Move,	you	old	fool,	or	you	will	become	the	dust	under	the	hoofs	of	our	horses,”
Dhantavakra	cried.
Vasuki	 looked	 at	 him	 with	 a	 contemptuous	 smile	 but	 addressed	 Ekalavya.
“Indraprastha	is	too	strong	to	be	taken	by	this	small	army.	Besides,	any	attack	on
Indraprastha	will	turn	the	anger	of	Bhishma	upon	us	and	the	Hastinapura	army	will
finish	 us	 off	 in	 no	 time.	 We	 need	 money	 to	 raise	 a	 proper	 army	 and	 we	 need	 a
fortified	city	from	which	we	can	operate.	Krishna	is	playing	games	here.	We	will
turn	the	tables	on	him.	He	has	left	Dwaraka	to	a	pacifist,	his	brother	Balarama.	We
will	 storm	 their	 city	 and	 throw	 out	 the	 Yadavas.	 Once	 Dwaraka	 falls,	 we	 can
control	both	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 and	 Hastinapura.	 We	 can	 choke	 the	 trade
routes	by	land	and	sea,	between	the	major	empires.	Dwaraka	is	far	from	here,	but
Ekalavya,	you	know	the	way	through	the	desert	and	forests.	Let	us	rush	to	take	the
city	of	Krishna.	I	will	somehow	reach	Takshaka.	If	Krishna	follows	you	to	save
his	 city,	 we	 will	 prepare	 an	 ambush	 for	 him.	 Go	 to	 Dwaraka…	 now!”	 Vasuki
stood	waving	his	crooked	staff.
Ekalavya	and	Shalva	looked	at	each	other	in	astonishment.	The	old	man’s	strategy
was	 risky	 but	 brilliant.	 Balarama	 was	 a	 pacifist	 and	 he	 would	 not	 fight.	 They
could	 easily	 take	 Krishna’s	 city	 from	 him.	 Dhantavakra	 blew	 his	 conch	 and	 the
army	turned	towards	the	southwest	and	thundered	past	Vasuki	as	he	watched	with
a	 satisfied	 smile.	 Once	 they	 succeeded	 in	 taking	 Dwaraka,	 the	 leadership	 of	 the
Nagas	and	the	revolution	would	be	back	with	him	instead	of	that	upstart	Takshaka.
Nevertheless,	 he	 had	 to	 find	 the	 Naga	 leader	 in	 order	 to	 ambush	 Krishna.	 He

walked	as	fast	as	he	could	towards	the	forest,	in	search	of	Takshaka.
***

Suyodhana	 and	 his	 troops	 were	 nearing	 the	 ridge	 over	 the	 Yamuna	 when
Aswathama	drew	their	attention	to	 the	rising	column	of	dust	on	the	southwestern
horizon.	They	could	see	the	vanishing	end	of	a	cavalry	column,	racing	towards	the
desert.
“Who	is	that?”	Suyodhana	asked	in	surprise.
Suddenly,	 from	 the	 rear,	 more	 cavalry	 appeared	 and	 galloped	 past	 at	 a	 furious
pace.	 At	 their	 head	 rode	 Krishna,	 his	 face	 grim	 and	 anxious.	 Sushasana	 leaned
from	his	saddle	and	pulled	at	the	reins	of	a	passing	soldier.	The	horse	swerved,
neighing	 in	 fear.	 Other	 riders	 jumped	 over	 the	 struggling	 horse	 without	 slowing.
Sushasana	dragged	the	fallen	man	from	the	path	of	the	pounding	hoofs.	When	they
had	 seen	 the	 tail	 of	 the	 last	 horse	 disappear,	 they	 asked	 the	 captured	 man	 the
reason	for	the	commotion.	He	told	them	the	story	of	Shishupala’s	murder	and	the
news	of	Dhantavakra	and	a	Nishada	leading	an	army	to	attack	Dwaraka,	to	avenge
the	death	of	their	friend.
Shakuni,	 who	 had	 accompanied	 his	 nephew	 to	 the	 rajasuya,	 heard	 the	 news	 of
Krishna	 leaving	 Indraprastha	 and	 fondly	 caressed	 the	 dice	 lying	 hidden	 in	 the
folds	of	his	dress.	The	game	was	getting	exciting.	This	was	the	beginning	of	the
end	of	India,	he	told	himself.	He	could	not	help	laughing.	As	suddenly	as	it	had
appeared,	the	glee	in	the	Gandhara	Prince’s	face	vanished.	The	master	of	dice	had
planned	his	next	move.

26	THE	FALL
“IT	IS	BREATH-TAKING!”	SUYODHANA	exclaimed	as	they	neared	the	city	gates.

Aswathama	and	Karna	were	gazing	at	the	golden	spires	of	the	palace,	glistening	in
the	late	afternoon	sun.	“I	wonder	how	much	they	spent	in	creating	such	a	marvel,”
Aswathama	said	and	whistled	softly,	taking	in	the	beautiful	gardens.	They	moved
slowly	 through	 the	 broad	 avenues	 of	 Indraprastha,	 exclaiming	 at	 each	 new
wonder,	pointing	at	the	sculptures	and	fountains	that	lined	every	junction,	excited
to	be	nearing	the	palace	itself.
“I	wonder	how	Yudhishtra	succeeded	in	solving	the	greatest	problem	that	plagues
our	country.	Do	you	see	there	are	no	poor	people	in	the	streets?	The	place	looks
rich	and	prosperous,”	Suyodhana	said,	trying	to	control	his	pangs	of	jealousy.
“Suyodhana,”	 Karna	 moved	 his	 horse	 forward	 to	 keep	 pace	 with	 the	 Crown
Prince.	 ”Do	 you	 notice	 something	 strange?	 There	 are	 only	 a	 few	 people	 in	 the
streets	and	they	all	look	important.	Why	does	the	city	look	so	deserted	of	common
folk?	A	city	this	size	should	be	buzzing	with	activity,	especially	since	the	rajasuya
is	going	on.	“
“It	does	not	look	like	there	has	been	a	battle	or	riot	in	the	city	streets.	Everything
is	 in	 order.	 Perhaps	 all	 the	 citizens	 are	 at	 the	 rajasuya	venue,”	 Suyodhana	 said
calmly,	though	he	too	had	begun	to	worry	about	the	uncanny	silence	that	pervaded
this	 place.	 They	 could	 hear	 the	 bells	 of	 police	 chariots	 on	 patrol,	 but	 they	 only
amplified	the	edgy	silence	that	cloaked	the	sombre	city.
“Hey,	 look!”	 Karna	 shouted	 suddenly	 and	 jumped	 down	 from	 his	 horse.
Suyodhana	saw	him	run	to	the	pavement	and	lean	over	a	bundle	of	rags	lying	at	the
door	of	a	closed	shop.	A	dog	barked	suddenly	and	shot	towards	Karna,	its	teeth
snapping	viciously.
The	 bundle	 stirred.	 Suyodhana	 exclaimed,	 “It	 is	 a	 man	 and	 he	 is	 alive!”	 He
dismounted	hurriedly	and	ran	to	Karna.

Aswathama	 followed	 his	 friends.	 The	 dog	 tried	 keeping	 them	 at	 bay.	 A	 tattered
blanket	 moved	 and	 the	 man	 moaned	 for	 water.	 Karna	 took	 another	 step	 forward
but	the	dog	jumped	at	him.	He	moved	quickly	away	and	the	dog	fell	with	a	yelp.
“The	 dog	 is	 blind,”	 Aswathama	 said,	 carefully	 placing	 his	 hand	 on	 the	 animal’s
head.	 When	 it	 tried	 to	 snap,	 he	 began	 gently	 caressing	 it	 with	 soothing	 strokes
while	speaking	gently.	The	dog	calmed	down	and	put	its	paws	on	the	Brahmin’s
shoulders.	Aswathama	submitted	to	its	licks	with	a	smile.	A	funny	thought	entered
his	 head:	 he	 wished	 his	 father	 could	 see	 him	 now,	 accepting	 the	 devotion	 of	 a
street	dog.	When	he	was	barely	six	years	old,	he	had	once	dragged	a	puppy	home.
It	had	made	his	father	blind	with	rage.	Drona	had	beaten	Aswathama	until	the	cane
broke,	saying	it	was	a	sin	for	a	Brahmin	to	have	a	dog	as	a	pet.	Dogs	were	dirty
animals,	and	represented	all	that	was	considered	sinful	in	the	Brahminical	world:
dogs	were	attached	to	their	masters;	they	guarded	territory	and	fought	for	it;	they
were	 emotional	 and	 loved	 life	 too	 much.	 A	 dog	 was	 the	 symbol	 of	 man’s
attachment	 to	 this	 illusory	 world,	 whereas	 a	 cow	 was	 holy	 because	 it	 was
unattached	 to	 its	 master	 and	 went	 through	 life	 with	 equanimity.	 For	 Aswathama,
the	reasons	his	father	had	enumerated	were	the	very	ones	that	drew	his	love	and
respect.	He	hugged	the	blind	dog	and	it	continued	licking	his	face	with	a	love	no
human	was	capable	of.
Karna	carefully	moved	away	the	tattered	covering	and	Suyodhana	turned	his	face
away	in	horror.	There	were	deep	blue	bruises	on	the	man’s	scarred	face	and	the
blanket	 was	 wet	 with	 blood.	 Karna	 shouted	 for	 water.	 Immediately,	 a	 soldier
came	running	with	a	water	pot.	He	poured	water	into	the	beggar’s	mouth	and	the
man	gulped	it	down	greedily.	Shivering,	he	painfully	tried	to	get	up,	but	collapsed
back	onto	the	ground.
Suyodhana	reached	out	and	lifted	him	up.	“What	happened	to	you?”
“Someone	 who	 was	 in	 a	 hurry	 to	 reach	 my	 Lord’s	 abode	 pushed	 me	 out	 of	 his
way.	Later	I	became	my	Lord’s	pathway	and	I	was	run	over	by	him,”	the	beggar
answered	enigmatically.
“What	is	he	blabbering	about?”	asked	Aswathama.
“It	seems	that	first	Ekalavya’s	army	knocked	him	down	and	then	Krishna’s	army
rode	over	him	in	their	pursuit	of	Ekalavya’s	men,”	Suyodhana	said.

The	 beggar	 cried,	 “Krishna!	 Blessed	 am	 I	 that	 I	 could	 offer	 my	 body	 for	 you	 to
tread	 upon.	 Blessed	 is	 Jara,	 for	 even	 in	 your	 hurry	 you	 thought	 about	 this	 poor
devotee	and	touched	me	with	your	horse’s	hoofs.	Your	leela	is	unfathomable,	your
love	immeasurable,	my	Lord.”
“Well	Suyodhana,	one	answer	to	your	question	stands	before	you.	Here	is	a	poor
man	 in	 Indraprastha,”	 Karna	 said.	 ‘Why	 do	 you	 come	 to	 break	 my	 heart	 always
Jara?’	he	thought	to	himself.
“I	know	this	person…”
Before	Suyodhana	could	complete	his	words,	Jara	said	to	him,	“You	want	to	see
the	poor	of	this	city?	Come	with	me.	The	poor	are	the	blessed	for	they	are	the	true
devotees	of	my	Lord.	When	someone	loves	my	Lord	sincerely,	the	Lord	loves	him
back	manifold.	The	first	thing	He	does	is	take	away	wealth.	He	gives	his	devotees
unhappiness	and	suffering,	for	He	knows	that	only	in	suffering	can	we	remember
His	glory.	If	we	have	wealth	and	happiness,	we	will	not	think	about	Him	and	will
thus	 remain	 immersed	 in	 worldly	 pleasures.	 He	 gives	 us	 misfortunes	 so	 that	 we
hate	the	illusory	world	and	strive	for	moksha.	He	is	compassionate.	Come	and	see
His	 people,	 my	 Hari’s	 people,	 my	 Krishna’s	 people,	 and	 you	 will	 know	 what
heaven	is.”
“Whoever	his	Lord	is,	he	seems	to	be	an	insecure	person,	obsessed	with	everyone
singing	 his	 glory	 and	 praises,”	 Aswathama	 quipped.	 Everyone	 except	 Jara	 and
Suyodhana	laughed.
“Krishna,	 Krishna…”	 Jara	 ran	 towards	 the	 river,	 crying	 his	 Lord’s	 name	 in
ecstasy.
Dharma	 freed	 himself	 from	 Aswathama’s	 grasp	 and	 ran	 after	 his	 master.
Suyodhana	and	his	friends	followed.	When	they	reached	the	ghat,	they	saw	Jara
pleading	with	the	boatman	to	take	them	to	the	opposite	bank.	The	boatman	looked
annoyed,	 but	when	he	saw	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 companions,	 his	 attitude	 changed
suddenly.	He	was	all	obsequious	eagerness	as	he	ran	to	free	his	boat.
They	left	their	army	on	the	city	shore	and	travelled	with	the	beggar	and	his	dog	to
the	other	side	of	the	Yamuna.	As	the	boat	moved	toward	the	colony	of	the	poor	and
Untouchables,	 the	 sun	 slowly	 dissolved	 in	 the	 purple	 waters	 of	 the	 river.	 The

horizon	was	peppered	with	birds	hurrying	home.	Crows	lamented	the	dying	of	the
day.	Jara	began	singing	his	Lord’s	praises.	The	men	sat	mesmerized	by	the	beauty
of	the	river.	They	forgot	everything	but	the	rich	voice	of	the	beggar,	the	sound	of
the	paddle	hitting	the	water	in	time	to	his	poignant	song,	and	the	river	caressing
their	 boat	 and	 flowing	 away.	 As	 they	 approached	 the	 opposite	 ghat,	 a	 silver
crescent	moon	in	the	eastern	sky	found	reflection	in	the	water	before	it	broke	into
a	million	ripples.
When	they	stepped	onto	the	ghat,	a	dark	man	jumped	in	front	of	them.	Suyodhana
was	 stunned	 by	 his	 sudden	 appearance	 and	 his	 hand	 went	 to	 his	 sword.	 But	 the
man	 caught	 hold	 of	 Suyodhana’s	 wrist	 blabbering,	 “Are	 you	 a	 Prince?	 Yes,	 you
look	rich.	But	why	should	a	Prince	come	to	visit	us?	We	are	Untouchables.	No	one
comes	here,	at	least	not	anyone	like	you.	You	will	become	polluted	and	fall	from
your	 exalted	 caste.	 Maybe	 you	 have	 come	 in	 search	 of	 me?	 Do	 you	 want	 an
architect	to	build	a	city	in	your	kingdom?	I	can	do	it.	Take	me	with	you	and	I	will
build	a	city	that	will	make	this	cursed	place	look	like	a	child’s	sandcastle.	I	built
that	city	for	them	and	then	they	banished	me	from	it.	If	I	build	a	city	for	you,	you
must	allow	us	a	corner…	a	little	space	for	me	and	my	people.	I	promise	we	will
not	pollute	you.	Just	a	little	space…	that	is	all	we	ask...	a	little	respect…	a	little
consideration.	 We	 too	 are	 human	 and	 it	 is	 not	 our	 fault	 that	 we	 were	 born	 with
dark	skins.	I	promise	to	build	a	great	city	for	you.	Have	you	seen	Indraprastha?	I
built	it…	we	all	built	it…	in	the	sun…	in	the	rain…	the	women	and	children	of
this	village	built	that	glistening	city	of	gold…	I	sculpted	the	God	in	the	temple...
but	 he	 is	 blind…	 they	 did	 not	 allow	 me	 to	 complete	 my	 work.	 If	 I	 build	 you	 a
bigger	temple,	will	you	allow	me	to	give	eyes	to	the	Gods?”
Suyodhana	 gripped	 Aswathama’s	 hands	 for	 support	 and	 Karna	 gritted	 his	 teeth.
They	 understood	 who	 the	 babbling	 lunatic	 was.	 It	 was	 Mayasura,	 the	 legendary
architect.	 The	 Pandavas	 had	 banished	 the	 likes	 of	 Mayasura	 to	 the	 grim	 world
beyond	 the	 Yamuna,	 far	 away	 from	 their	 great	 city,	 to	 the	 land	 of	 the	 poor	 and
destitute.	The	stink	of	urine	and	excrement	hit	them	like	a	body	blow.	When	their
eyes	 adjusted	 to	 the	 dim	 light,	 they	 could	 see	 league	 upon	 league	 of	 shanties.
Small	oil	lamps	flickered	here	and	there	and	they	could	hear	the	noise	of	drunken
brawls	and	screaming.	There	was	enough	misery	 here	 for	everyone	 to	hate	their
lives	and	pray	for	moksha.	The	Lord’s	compassion	was	overwhelming.
“Mayasura,	what	are	you	doing?”	An	old	man	came	and	grabbed	the	architect	by
the	hand.	But	he	fell	silent	when	he	saw	Karna.	His	eyes	wandered	over	Karna’s

armour.	When	he	saw	the	warrior’s	dark	eyes	staring	back	at	him,	he	turned	away
saying,	“He	is	not	keeping	well.	Sometimes,	when	he	is	not	working,	he	loses	his
senses	 and	 blabbers	 like	 this.	 He	 is	 not	 mad	 as	 you	 may	 think.	 In	 fact,	 he	 is	 a
genius.”
When	Mayasura	noticed	Karna’s	armour,	he	exclaimed,	“Father,	is	our	armour	as
strong	as	this	man’s?	We	may	have	to	change	the	design.”
The	 old	 man’s	 face	 turned	 pale	 with	 fear	 as	 he	 tried	 dragging	 Mayasura	 away
before	he	could	say	something	to	endanger	them	both.	Some	of	the	onlookers	who
had	 gathered	 to	 watch	 the	 scene,	 began	 making	 loud	 comments	 questioning
Mayasura’s	sanity.
As	 they	 disappeared	 into	 the	 darkness,	 Aswathama	 shouted	 after	 them,	 “What
about	Karna’s	armour,	Mayasura?”
The	 architect	 paused	 and	 shouted	 back,	 “We	 are	 designing	 a	 weapon	 that	 can
pierce	Karna’s	armour.	Have	you	heard	of	Karna?	He	is	Arjuna’s	greatest	enemy
and	Arjuna	is	my	father’s	son.	My	father	is	Indra,	King	of	the	Devas.	But	he	loves
me	more	than	he	loves	his	real	son,	so	he	lives	with	me.	We	are	going	to	present
the	arrow	to	Arjuna	so	he	can	kill	Karna.	That	will	please	the	Prince	and	he	may
allow	me	to	complete	my	sculpture	of	Lord	Shiva	and	open	his	eyes.”	His	voice
faded	away	in	the	din	from	the	slums	as	Indra	dragged	Mayasura	away.	He	was
afraid	that	Karna	or	Suyodhana	would	come	after	him.
“That	old	man	looks	oddly	familiar,”	Karna	said,	staring	at	the	vanishing	duo.
“He	is	Indra,	the	fallen	King	of	the	Devas.	He	looks	familiar	because	he	is	the	real
father	of	Arjuna,”	Suyodhana	told	his	friend.
“That	explains	why	he	is	after	me,”	Karna	said	with	a	crooked	smile.
Before	the	others	could	react,	 Jara	called	to	them	to	tour	the	 slum	with	him	and
see	the	people	who	lived	here.	The	deeper	they	moved	into	the	hellhole,	the	more
depressing	it	became.	Shakuni,	who	had	come	with	them	but	remained	silently	in
the	background,	was	bubbling	with	joy.	These	foolish	Indians	and	their	Gods	and
god	 men	 were	 making	 his	 task	 easier	 by	 the	 day.	 Yudhishtra	 had	 created	 a	 huge
opportunity	for	Takshaka	to	recruit	people	into	his	revolutionary	army.	‘I	should

bring	this	to	the	attention	of	Durjaya	too,’	thought	the	Gandhara	Prince.	How	long
could	India	resist	her	enemies,	with	such	a	heartless	caste	system,	useless	rituals,
corrupt	rulers,	irresponsible	citizens,	and	a	religion	that	denied	the	real	world	for
the	sake	of	imaginary	happiness?	‘You	are	bleeding	from	a	thousand	cuts	and	your
downfall	 is	 imminent,’	 the	 foreigner	 thought	 with	 malice.	 A	 war,	 a	 bloody,	 allconsuming,	all-destroying	war,	was	coming,	when	all	the	Indian	kingdoms	would
clash	and	destroy	each	other.	Shakuni	could	smell	the	blood;	he	could	feel	death	in
the	air.	The	end	was	coming.	The	sound	of	war	drums	was	deafening.
“I	cannot	stand	this	anymore.	What	sort	of	world	has	Yudhishtra	created?	This	is	a
cursed	city.	The	Pandavas	have	built	a	city	on	the	carnage	of	thousands	of	men	and
beasts.	 They	 destroyed	 Khandiva	 forest	 and	 killed	 everything	 in	 it.	 They	 are
treating	the	majority	of	their	people	like	worms	in	order	to	please	a	few	Priests!
Come,	 let	 us	 go	 to	 Yudhishtra’s	 fine	 palace	 and	 ask	 the	 Son	 of	 Dharma	 a	 few
pertinent	questions,”	said	Suyodhana,	his	mind	and	heart	sickened	by	what	he	had
seen.
Suyodhana	rushed	back	to	the	ghat	and	ordered	the	boatman	to	row	them	back	to
the	city.	His	friends	followed.	Jara	accompanied	 them	 to	 the	 riverbank.	 No	 one
spoke.	Though	the	Crown	Prince	kept	a	level	head	most	of	the	time,	his	anger	was
legendry	 once	 aroused.	 Now	 he	 said	 in	 a	 voice	 in	 which	 rage	 had	 overcome
caution,	 “First	 they	 murdered	 a	 Nishada	 woman	 and	 her	 five	 children	 in
Varanavata.	 Then	 Krishna	 and	 Arjuna	 executed	 the	 great	 massacre	 of	 Khandiva.
Then	 King	 Jarasandha	 and	 his	 Nishada	 General	 were	 killed	 by	 trickery	 and
Shishupala	murdered	in	cold	blood.	How	many	more	must	die	for	their	ambition?
How	many	will	they	kill	in	the	name	dharma?	Murder,	arson,	rape,	everything	is
explained	away	or	justified	by	a	few	Priests.	This	hypocrisy	is	galling.	See	how
they	have	treated	Mayasura.	In	any	other	kingdom,	they	would	be	erecting	statues
honouring	him	and	Kings	would	be	competing	for	his	talent.	Here,	he	is	banished
to	 the	 stinking	 outer	 city	 because	 he	 was	 born	 an	 avarna	 and	 Untouchable.	 So
many	 people	 are	 living	 there	 like	 pigs,	 in	 abject	 poverty,	 and	 those	 bastard
Pandavas	are	taking	pride	in	building	a	city	of	riches.	Such	acts	have	given	birth
to	Takshaka	and	Durjaya.	I	fear	for	people	like	that	beggar	Jara,	blind	in	their	faith
and	 innocent	 at	 heart.	 They	 are	 fodder	 for	 the	 raging	 ambition	 of	 men	 like
Yudhishtra.”
His	 friends	 heard	 him	 out	 patiently.	 He	 was	 echoing	 their	 thoughts.	 Shakuni,
immersed	in	deep	reflection,	kept	clicking	his	dice	together	in	his	right	hand	and

running	the	fingers	of	his	left	hand	through	his	salt-and-pepper	beard.	The	sight	of
the	palace	bathed	in	golden	light	and	the	contrast	it	presented	with	the	darkness	on
the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 Yamuna,	 added	 flame	 to	 Suyodhana’s	 anger.	 The	 breeze
carried	the	faint	notes	of	Jara’s	song	from	across	the	river.	To	him,	his	song	was
an	act	of	piety	and	prayer;	for	the	Prince	and	his	friends,	it	sounded	more	like	the
lament	of	a	broken	people	clinging	to	the	feeble	straw	of	faith	to	stay	alive	in	this
turbulent	world.
***

When	Suyodhana	and	his	friends	stormed	into	the	palace,	the	King	of	Indraprastha
was	 enjoying	 an	 evening	 of	 music	 and	 dance.	 The	 sabha	 was	 filled	 with
courtesans,	 nobles,	 Priests,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 Kings	 and	 Princes	 who	 had	 accepted
Yudhishtra’s	 suzerainty.	 Many	 warriors	 and	 Princes	 had	 died	 in	 the	 scuffle
following	 the	 murder	 of	 Shishupala,	 but	 that	 did	 not	 dampen	 the	 festivities.
Yudhishtra’s	 brothers	 and	 Draupadi	 sat	 near	 him,	 as	 did	 the	 Priests.	 When
Suyodhana	strode	into	the	hall,	the	sabha	fell	silent	and	every	head	turned	towards
him.	He	stood	contemptuously	viewing	the	luxury	everywhere.	Behind	him	stood
Karna,	Sushasana,	and	Aswathama,	matching	the	Crown	Prince’s	look	of	disdain.
Shakuni	 stood	 with	 a	 smile	 playing	 on	 his	 lips.	 Suyodhana	 fixed	 his	 gaze	 on
Yudhishtra.
“Welcome,	Suyodhana,”	Yudhishtra	said,	getting	up	to	greet	his	cousin.
“So,	 this	 is	 the	 palace	 built	 over	 dead	 bodies	 and	 the	 place	 where	 the	 King	 of
Chedi	 was	 murdered	 in	 cold	 blood.	 Yudhishtra,	 you	 have	 banished	 half	 the
population	 from	 your	 city.	 You	 should	 hang	 your	 head	 in	 shame	 at	 the	 way	 you
have	treated	the	people	who	built	Indraprastha.”
“Enough,	 Duryodhana!”	 Dhaumya	 interrupted.	 “This	 model	 state	 will	 always	 be
ruled	 by	 the	 holy	 smritis.	 How	 dare	 you	 come	 here	 and	 insult	 the	 epitome	 of
dharma?	 What	 do	 you	 know	 about	 dharma?	 You	 are	 the	 one	 who	 should	 be
ashamed	for	befriending	a	lowly	Suta	and	making	him	a	King;	you	are	the	one	who
should	hang	your	head	in	shame	for	having	Aswathama,	who	is	a	disgrace	to	all
Brahmins,	 as	 a	 friend.	 You	 are	 trying	 to	 destroy	 our	 society.	 But	 you	 will	 never
succeed	as	long	as	I	live.”	He	stopped	his	tirade	when	he	saw	Suyodhana	rushing
towards	 him	 with	 sword	 drawn.	 His	 disciples	 scrambled	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 way.
Dhaumya	shouted,	“Ma…	Ma…	he	is	going	to	murder	me!	Is	there	no	protection

for	a	poor	Brahmin	in	this	kingdom?	Arjuna,	Bhima,	help	me…”
Before	 the	 Pandavas	 could	 make	 sense	 of	 what	 was	 happening,	 Suyodhana	 had
reached	the	group	of	Priests	who	were	running	like	mice	before	a	cat.	Dhaumya
ran	towards	Yudhishtra	as	Suyodhana	chased	him,	pushing	people	away	as	he	ran
after	 the	 Chief	 Priest.	 His	 friends	 tried	 to	 stop	 the	 Crown	 Prince,	 but	 it	 was
impossible	 for	 anyone	 to	 swerve	 Suyodhana	 from	 his	 purpose	 once	 he	 was
angered.	 However,	 fate	 often	 intervenes	 in	 curious	 ways.	 In	 his	 blind	 anger,
Suyodhana	did	not	notice	the	sunken	pool	in	the	floor.	It	was	a	foot	deep	and	three
feet	wide,	but	it	ran	from	one	wall	of	the	sabha	to	the	other.	Except	for	the	darker
shade	 of	 tiles,	 it	 merged	 with	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 sabha	 and	 could	 not	 be	 easily
distinguished,	as	the	polished	floor	reflected	as	much	light	as	did	the	water	in	the
pool.	Dhaumya	instinctively	jumped	over	the	narrow	pool,	but	Suyodhana	stepped
into	the	water	unknowingly	and	fell	flat	on	his	face.	The	impact	threw	his	sword
from	his	hand	and	it	clanged	onto	the	floor	near	Yudhishtra’s	feet.
For	 a	 moment,	 there	 was	 perfect	 silence.	 His	 friends	 rushed	 to	 Suyodhana’s
rescue.	But	he	stood	up	before	they	could	reach	him.	His	dhoti	slipped	from	his
waist	 and	 lay	 limp	 in	 the	 water.	 Everyone	 watched	 the	 unfolding	 drama	 with
shocked	 faces.	 The	 Crown	 Prince	 of	 Hastinapura	 stood	 ridiculously	 exposed,
wincing	 in	 pain	 and	 anger,	 naked	 except	 for	 a	 loincloth,	 in	 front	 of	 the	 grand
assembly.	No	one	dared	utter	a	word.
Karna	leaned	down	to	pick	up	Suyodhana’s	dhoti	from	 the	 water.	 As	 he	 did	 so,
laughter	echoed	though	the	hall.
“Andha!	Blind,	just	like	his	father.”	It	was	Draupadi.	She	bit	her	lip	pointing	to	the
naked	Suyodhana,	no	longer	able	to	control	her	mirth.
Laughter	 filled	 the	 hall	 and	 became	 a	 roar.	 The	 whole	 assembly	 shook	 with
amusement.	 Suyodhana	 stood	 naked	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 Court,	 laughter	 and
ridicule	burning	his	ears,	shamed	and	insulted	beyond	imagination,	as	the	Priests
who	 had	 run	 away	 in	 fear	 a	 few	 moments	 before,	 came	 back	 boldly	 and	 began
showering	 abuse	 on	 him.	 Suyodhana	 refused	 to	 take	 his	 dhoti	 from	 his	 friend’s
hand	or	come	out	of	the	pool	that	barely	wet	his	ankles.	He	stood	there	defiantly
while	insults	and	ridicule	showered	on	him	from	all	sides.
“Serves	 you	 right,	 you	 son	 of	 a	 blind	 man,”	 Dhaumya	 shouted	 at	 Suyodhana.

Gazing	 at	 the	 assembly	 of	 nobles	 and	 vassal	 Kings,	 he	 said,	 “All	 Kings	 and
Kshatriyas	present	here,	behold	this	scene.	It	is	a	lesson	to	all.	This	is	the	penalty
for	insulting	a	Brahmin.	God	has	willed	it	to	happen.
This	 is	 the	 price	 for	 elevating	 a	 Suta	 to	 kingship;	 this	 is	 the	 cost	 of	 speaking
against	our	holy	smritis.	But	it	is	just	the	beginning.	This	evil	man	will	pay	dearly
for	his	sins.	See	how	he	stands	naked,	like	any	ordinary	slave.”
“Andha,	 Andha…”	 the	 Priests	 took	 up	 the	 chorus	 amidst	 catcalls	 and	 whistles.
Only	Arjuna	stood	grim-faced,	his	head	bowed	and	arms	crossed.	Draupadi	made
no	attempt	to	hide	her	amusement.	Her	eyes	met	those	of	Karna,	fuming	with	rage
at	what	was	happening	to	his	friend.	At	the	sight	of	the	man	she	secretly	loved,	the
shame	of	sharing	her	bed	with	five	men	came	rushing	back	to	fill	her	aching	heart.
With	a	viciousness	that	only	a	woman	trying	to	hide	her	own	yearning	can	show,
she	said	to	Karna,	“Suta,	drive	your	friend	away	in	your	chariot	before	he	loses
his	loincloth	too.”
Karna’s	sword	was	out	in	a	flash,	but	Aswathama	held	him	back.
“The	 Suta	 thinks	 he	 can	 fight	 Arjuna?	 What	 a	 joke!”	 Dhaumya	 cried	 as	 the	 hall
reverberated	with	more	laughter	and	whistles.
Shakuni	looked	at	the	fools	laughing	around	him	and	thanked	his	stars.	They	were
laughing	 at	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 of	 the	 most	 powerful	 empire	 in	 India	 because	 a
potbellied	 Priest	 did	 not	 like	 him.	 They	 were	 insulting	 the	 best	 archer	 in	 India
because	he	was	born	in	a	low	caste.	The	Gandhara	Prince	wanted	to	fall	on	his
knees,	 face	 West	 towards	 Gandhara,	 and	 thank	 God	 for	 the	 windfall.	 But	 as	 he
stood	watching	his	nephew	being	ridiculed,	all	traces	of	the	elation	he	felt	were
hidden	behind	the	grim	expression	on	his	face.
Suyodhana	 raised	 his	 head	 and	 brushed	 back	 the	 dark	 wavy	 hair	 that	 had	 fallen
into	his	eyes.	He	shook	his	head	to	free	it	of	water.	Then	he	glared	at	Yudhishtra.
The	 King	 of	 Indraprastha	 took	 a	 quick	 breath.	 Suyodhana	 turned	 to	 gaze	 at
Draupadi,	and	her	laughter	trailed	into	silence.	She	looked	down	at	her	toes,	not
wanting	to	face	the	Crown	Prince.	Suyodhana	took	a	step	out	of	the	pool.	Dhaumya
backed	 away	 and	 vanished	 behind	 the	 group	 of	 Priests.	 Aswathama	 handed	 him
the	dhoti,	 but	 Suyodhana	 refused	 to	 take	 it,	 flicking	 it	 away	 with	 one	 hand.	 The
hall	 grew	 silent	 again.	 Without	 saying	 a	 word,	 without	 attempting	 to	 cover	 his

nakedness,	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 of	 Hastinapura	 walked	 out	 of	 the	 hall	 with	 his
friends	in	tow.	As	he	walked	amidst	them	in	a	loincloth,	his	head	held	high,	the
Kings	 and	 Princes	 bowed	 in	 fear	 and	 respect.	 They	 were	 ashamed	 of	 their
conduct,	but	the	urge	to	laugh	at	the	fall	of	an	important	man	had	taken	possession
of	them	for	a	moment.	He	acknowledged	their	bows	with	curt	nods	and	walked	out
into	 the	 darkness,	 his	 eyes	 looking	 straight	 ahead.	 The	 silence	 of	 the	 tomb
descended	on	Yudhishtra’s	palace.
***

Aswathama,	 Karna,	 and	 Sushasana,	 were	 urging	 Suyodhana	 to	 declare	 war	 on
Indraprastha.	It	was	mid-afternoon,	three	days	after	the	incident	and	they	were	in
the	Prince’s	chambers.	No	man	ought	to	swallow	an	insult	like	that.	Indraprastha
ought	to	be	called	upon	to	pay	the	price	of	her	indiscretion.	They	were	sure	they
could	convince	the	Grand	Regent	about	the	justice	of	their	cause.	How	long	could
a	 puny	 little	 kingdom	 like	 Indraprastha	 last	 before	 the	 might	 of	 Hastinapura?
Besides,	Krishna	was	away,	fighting	the	Nishada,	if	the	Yadava	had	managed	to
reach	 Dwaraka	 at	 all.	 The	 Southern	 Confederate	 was	 in	 shambles	 without	 the
leadership	 of	 Parashurama,	 who	 still	 lay	 in	 a	 coma.	 This	 was	 the	 right	 time	 to
finish	off	the	Pandavas	and	impose	more	humane	laws	that	were	not	based	on	any
scriptures,	 respected	 all	 faiths,	 had	 no	 caste-based	 privileges,	 and	 treated
everyone	 the	 same.	 This	 was	 the	 moment	 to	 save	 the	 country	 from	 the	 anarchy
Takshaka	envisaged	or	the	theocracy	of	Dhaumya	and	Parashurama.
Suyodhana	hesitated.	He	too	wanted	to	do	what	his	friends	suggested.	He	found	it
difficult	to	swallow	the	insult	or	forgive	and	forget.	‘I	am	a	Kshatriya,	not	a	saint,’
he	kept	telling	himself.	Yet,	every	time	he	thought	of	war,	the	image	of	the	slums	he
had	visited	came	to	mind.	The	face	of	Jara	and	his	blind	dog	danced	before	his
eyes.	 The	 thought	 of	 Mayasura	 and	 the	 women	 and	 children	 who	 had	 toiled	 to
build	 that	 beautiful	 city,	 pulled	 him	 back	 from	 the	 brink.	 In	 the	 greater	 order	 of
things,	it	did	not	matter	that	he	had	been	insulted.	How	many	lives	were	to	be	lost
for	the	sake	of	his	honour?	The	poor	would	pay	the	price.	That	thought	made	him
weak.	However,	Draupadi’s	laughter	still	rang	in	his	ears.	‘How	could	they	insult
me	like	that?’	He	burned	with	shame	whenever	he	remembered	standing	naked	in
the	middle	of	Yudhishtra’s	sabha.	Was	there	a	way	to	make	the	Pandavas	pay,	yet
avoid	war?
Shakuni	was	 watching	 Suyodhana	closely.	His	 initial	 reaction	 to	 the	 incident	 in

Indraprastha	 had	 been	 glee.	 He	 looked	 forward	 to	 the	 impending	 war	 and
destruction	of	his	enemies,	but	the	intervening	three	days	had	caused	him	to	look	at
the	 situation	 with	 more	 logic.	 He	 feared	 that	 after	 the	 initial	 scuffle,	 Bhishma
would	intervene	and	arrange	a	patch	up	between	the	cousins,	and	his	dreams	of	an
apocalyptic	 war	 would	 fade	 away.	 Besides,	 Krishna	 was	 away.	 If	 there	 was
anyone	who	wanted	a	war	as	much	as	he	did,	it	was	Krishna.	The	participation	of
the	Southern	Confederate	was	doubtful,	and	Dwaraka	was	fighting	its	own	battles.
‘No,	a	war	at	this	time	would	not	suit	my	purposes,’	he	thought.	What	he	needed
was	a	conflict	involving	all	the	kingdoms	–	from	Pragjyothisha,	Anga,	Vanga,	etc.
in	 the	 East,	 to	 Dwaraka,	 Sind,	 Gandhara,	 etc.	 in	 the	 West	 –	 a	 grand	 war	 that
included	 the	 mountain	 kingdoms	 of	 the	 Himalayas	 to	 the	 Asura	 kingdoms	 of	 the
South,	like	Chera	and	Pandya.	The	armageddon	could	not	spare	a	single	kingdom
of	India.	He	yearned	for	the	total	destruction	of	this	cursed	land	and	its	misery.
“Prince,	there	is	another	way	to	exact	revenge	and	conquer,	without	firing	a	single
arrow	or	spilling	a	drop	of	blood,”	Shakuni	said,	as	if	reading	Suyodhana’s	mind.
They	 all	 turned	 to	 look	 at	 the	 foreigner	 with	 interest.	 “It	 is	 sanctioned	 by	 all
your…	 I	 mean	 our…	 holy	 scriptures.	 A	 King	 can	 conquer	 another	 kingdom	 by
marriage,	 war,	 payment,	 or	 dice.	 Why	 don’t	 we	 invite	 Yudhishtra	 to	 a	 game	 of
dice?”	Shakuni	said	with	a	smile.
They	looked	at	each	other.	Then	Aswathama	said,	“A	game	of	dice	is	a	game	of
chance.	What	is	the	guarantee	that	Yudhishtra	will	not	win?”
Shakuni	took	out	the	dice	from	the	folds	of	his	dhoti	and	said	a	silent	prayer.	With
his	eyes	closed,	he	cried,	“Twelve”.
Suyodhana	 and	 his	 friends	 watched	 anxiously	 as	 the	 dice	 spun	 on	 the	 floor,	 hit
each	other	in	fury,	reversed	the	direction	of	spin	for	a	moment,	and	finally	came	to
rest.	Both	showed	six	–	a	perfect	twelve!
“Eight,”	the	Gandhara	Prince	cried	and	threw	the	dice	again.	They	rolled	to	form
eight.	 “Six,”	 called	 Shakuni,	 and	 the	 dice	 obeyed.	 He	 threw	 the	 dice	 a	 hundred
times.	Each	time	the	dice	came	up	correctly.
Taking	up	the	challenge,	Karna,	Suyodhana,	Sushasana,	and	Aswathama,	each	took
turns	to	cry	out	numbers.	With	the	practised	ease	of	three	decades,	the	foreigner
rolled	the	dice.

When	 the	 show	 was	 over	 and	 the	 showman	 had	 bowed	 to	 his	 admiring	 fans,
Suyodhana	stood	up.	“Yes,	we	can	roll	the	dice.	We	will	send	the	Son	of	Dharma
an	invitation	he	cannot	refuse.	We	will	tie	him	in	the	knots	of	his	own	dharma.	We
too	can	play	games.”
A	 cheer	 rose	 from	 his	 friends	 as	 they	 hugged	 each	 other.	 Shakuni	 watched	 the
scene	with	amusement.	He	rolled	the	dice	for	the	hundred	and	first	time	and	cried
twelve.	That	roll	was	a	challenge,	a	dare	to	the	fools	that	ruled	India,	from	a	tiny
mountain	 kingdom	 on	 the	 outskirts	 of	 her	 ancient	 civilization.	 The	 Indians,	 who
kept	fighting	each	other	for	language,	caste,	religion,	race,	and	petty	egos,	did	not
see,	hear	or	feel	the	dice	rolling	over	their	holy	land.	The	dice	obeyed	the	foreign
hand	as	usual.

27	ROLL	OF	THE	DICE
to	 a	 game	 of	 dice.”	 Bhanumati	 gently
broached	the	subject	to	a	moody	Suyodhana.	He	merely	grunted.	When	she	asked
him	again,	he	left	the	room	in	silence.	She	knew	he	was	hurt,	but	did	not	want	the
hurt	to	fester	into	a	wound.	There	was	enough	hatred	around	them.	She	rarely	got
to	see	him	as	he	spent	most	of	his	time	with	Uncle	Shakuni.	Her	heart	ached	seeing
her	 husband	 filled	 with	 anger	 and	 bitterness.	 She	 yearned	 to	 have	 her	 generoushearted	husband	back.
“I	 HEAR	 YOU	 HAVE	 INVITED	 YUDHISHTRA	

A	few	days	before	the	game	of	dice	with	his	cousin,	Bhanumati	waited	to	confront
him	in	the	privacy	of	their	chamber.	By	the	time	he	came	in,	the	twins	were	sound
asleep.	He	hesitated	a	moment	at	the	entrance	and	she	could	see	him	checking	to
see	whether	the	children	were	asleep.	She	too,	feigned	sleep.	She	heard	him	blow
out	 the	 lamp,	 and	 felt	 the	 mattress	 sink	 under	 his	 weight.	 Then	 she	 turned	 and
gently	touched	his	shoulder.	Immediately,	she	felt	him	stiffen.	She	was	afraid	but
determined.	She	could	no	longer	hold	herself	back.	“Do	we	need	to	make	it	such	a
big	issue?”
There	was	no	reaction.	Softly	she	said,	“It	was	just	an	accident...”
“Stay	out	of	this,	Bhanu!”	Suyodhana	jumped	from	the	bed,	toppling	over	a	stool.
“This	is	not	just	about	me	and	my	cousin.	It	is	about	this	country	and	the	future	of
its	people.	You	have	not	seen	Indraprastha.	You	have	not	seen	how	the	poor	live	in
the	model	city	of	the	Pandavas.	You	have	not	seen...”
“Keep	your	lectures	for	your	friends.	Those	things	may	have	contributed	to	your
anger,	but	this	game	of	dice	has	more	to	do	with	your	ego	than...”
“It	is	not	only	me	they	insulted.	They	insulted	Karna	too.	Draupadi	asked	him	to
drive	me	in	his	chariot…”
“So	if	this	is	not	about	you,	it	is	about	your	friend	Karna.”
“Enough!”	 Suyodhana’s	 voice	 had	 an	 edge	 Bhanumati	 had	 never	 heard	 before.

“Yes,	 it	 is	 my	 ego.	 I	 was	 insulted.	 And	 you	 expect	 me	 to	 take	 such	 insults	 lying
down?	I	am	a	Kshatriya.	I	am	the	grandnephew	of	Bhishma.	You	expect	me	to	grin
and	 bear	 it?	 You	 expect	 me	 to	 keep	 quiet	 when	 they	 treat	 men	 like	 Mayasura
worse	than	a	worm?”
“Then	fight	but	do	not	trick	them.”	Bhanumati	was	trembling.
“And	be	responsible	for	thousands	of	deaths?	Be	the	reason	for	a	devastating	war
after	which	nothing	will	be	left?	This	way,	I	avoid	bloodshed.”
“That	is	not	the	Suyodhana	I	know.	That	is	not	my	husband	speaking,	but	the	Prince
of	Gandhara.”
“You	think	I	am	a	puppet	in	his	hands?	That	I	cannot	think	for	myself?”
In	the	dim	light	that	filtered	through	the	silk	curtains,	Bhanumati	saw	Suyodhana’s
eyes	glittering	with	insanity	and	hatred.	She	felt	afraid.	Bhanumati	quickly	moved
towards	her	daughter	who	stirred	and	gently	patted	her	back	to	sleep.	She	tried	to
control	 her	 tears.	 Without	 facing	 her	 husband,	 she	 said,	 “The	 path	 you	 are
choosing	 will	 lead	 us	 all	 to	 disaster.	 Forgive	 Draupadi	 her	 thoughtless	 remarks,
and	her	foolish	husbands.	You	have	the	generosity	to	forgive	the	mistakes	of	lesser
men.”
When	she	turned,	she	saw	only	the	curtains	swaying	in	the	wind.	 Suyodhana	 had
walked	into	the	darkness.	She	hugged	her	children,	trying	to	shut	out	the	ominous
hooting	of	an	owl	in	the	garden.	At	that	moment,	she	hated	Draupadi	with	all	her
heart.
***

“There	 she	 is!”	 Subhadra	 rushed	 in	 from	 the	 balcony.	 She	 had	 come	 to
Hastinapura	to	visit	Bhishma	as	the	Grand	Regent	wished	to	see	her	son.	He	had
written	to	invite	her	to	Hastinapura.	The	conch	sounded,	announcing	the	arrival	of
Yudhishtra,	King	of	Indraprastha,	and	his	brothers.	“I	will	go	get	her,”	Subhadra
said	as	she	went	out	with	her	young	son,	Abhimanyu,	who	ran	ahead	to	greet	his
father.
Bhanumati	sat	glued	to	her	seat.	She	heard	the	chariot	carrying	the	Pandavas	come
to	a	halt	on	the	gravelled	driveway.	She	could	hear	Abhimanyu	giggling	as	Arjuna

threw	 him	 up	 into	 the	 air	 and	 caught	 him	 again.	 She	 heard	 her	 husband’s	 voice
welcoming	 his	 cousins.	 She	 heard	 little	 Abhimanyu	 jump	 from	 his	 father	 to	 his
uncle,	 and	 the	 laughter	 that	 followed.	 She	 heard	 her	 husband	 joking	 with
Abhimanyu,	 whom	he	 regarded	 as	 another	 son.	 Subhadra	 joined	 in	 the	 laughter.
Bhanumati	heard	Arjuna	commenting	that	his	son	was	fonder	of	Suyodhana	than	of
him.	She	felt	choked.	Yudhishtra	asked	for	her.	Bhanumati	kept	watching	the	door,
fear	filling	her	heart.	Any	moment	now,	she	would	be	face	to	face	with	the	woman
she	hated.
“Bhanu,	see	who	has	come	to	see	you.”	Subhadra’s	excited	voice	floated	to	her	as
the	 colour	 drained	 from	 her	 face.	 Subhadra	 stood	 at	 the	 door,	 her	 lovely	 smile
lighting	 up	 the	 whole	 room.	 Behind	 her,	 Draupadi	 stood,	 gazing	 at	 her	 with	 a
smile.
Bhanumati	folded	her	hands	stiffly	in	greeting	and	managed	to	utter,	“Why	do	you
stand	at	the	door?	Come	in.”
Draupadi	 hurried	in	 and	grasped	Bhanumati’s	 hands,	pressing	them,	 almost	 as	 if
she	would	lose	her	courage	if	she	let	go.	“I	owe	you	and	your	husband	an	apology.
What	 I	 did	 was	 wrong.	 But	 I	 never	 meant	 any	 harm.	 Bhanumati,	 forgive	 me.
Suyodhana	 is	 like	 my	 brothers	 Dhristadyumna	 and	 Shikandi.	 I	 would	 often	 tease
them	but	they	always	took	it	in	their	stride.	What	happened	was	like	that.”
Bhanumati’s	heart	sank.	It	was	not	what	she	had	expected.	She	had	practiced	harsh
words	 and	 angry	 retorts	 to	 slight	 Draupadi,	 expecting	 her	 to	 behave	 in	 her
characteristic	haughty	manner.	But	Draupadi	had	disarmed	her	with	her	apology.
Draupadi	had	not	finished.	“I	know	Suyodhana	is	a	good	man.	If	he	had	taken	the
incident	to	heart,	he	would	not	have	invited	us	to	this	dice	game.	It	shows	he	has
forgiven	 us.	 He	 knows	 Yudhishtra	 likes	 nothing	 better	 than	 a	 game	 of	 dice.	 It	 is
good	of	your	husband	to	forgive	his	sister’s	mistake.”
“I	 know	 who	 you	 were	 really	 laughing	 at,	 Draupadi,”	 Subhadra	 said	 naughtily.
Bhanumati	 saw	 a	 smile	 tug	 at	 Draupadi’s	 beautiful	 mouth.	 “Does	 he	 still	 have	 a
place	 in	 your	 heart?	 Do	 you	 really	 need	 to	 hurt	 him	 so	 much?”	 Subhadra	 asked,
with	a	crooked	smile.
Draupadi	 turned	 away.	 Her	 voice	 was	 flat	 when	 she	 answered.	 “I	 do	 not	 know

which	Suta	you	are	talking	about,	Subhadra.”
“I	never	spoke	of	a	Suta	at	all,”	Subhadra	said	laughing.
Draupadi	 bit	 her	 lip	 as	 colour	 flooded	 her	 face.	 Then	 both	 women	 laughed.
Looking	 at	 them,	 Bhanumati	 thought	 perhaps	 there	 was	 some	 hope	 after	 all.	 If
Draupadi	told	Suyodhana	even	half	of	what	she	had	said	to	her,	everything	would
be	fine.	She	prayed	Suyodhana	would	come	into	the	room.
Draupadi	told	the	women	she	had	not	been	feeling	well	due	to	a	painful	menstrual
flow,	but	that	Yudhishtra	had	insisted	she	accompany	them	to	Hastinapura.	It	was
an	 important	 day	 for	 him	 and	 she	 could	 not	 stay	 behind.	 Draupadi	 had	 agreed,
thinking	 she	 could	 use	 the	 opportunity	 to	 make	 amends	 with	 Bhanumati	 and
Suyodhana,	for	her	indiscretion.
***

Yudhishtra	looked	around	at	the	gathering	of	noblemen	in	the	Hastinapura	sabha.
Arjuna	had	advised	him	to	decline	Suyodhana’s	invitation.	His	mother	Kunti	had
warned	him	about	the	possibility	of	being	ambushed	on	the	way.	Finally,	he	had
gone	 to	 Dhaumya	 for	 advice.	 The	 Priest	 had	 deliberated	 with	 his	 disciples	 and
other	scholars	and	said	it	was	a	Kshatriya’s	dharma	to	play	dice.	That	had	made
Yudhishtra	smile,	for	he	was	an	inveterate	gambler.	The	dice	game	excited	him	as
nothing	else	could.	Furthermore,	Suyodhana	had	promised	to	stake	his	position	as
Crown	Prince,	against	Indraprastha,	even	though	he	would	be	represented	in	the
game	by	his	uncle,	Shakuni,	Prince	of	Gandhara.
A	win	would	enable	Yudhishtra	to	grab	the	mighty	Hastinapura	Empire.	Given	the
support	he	already	enjoyed	with	the	Priestly	class,	the	Southern	Confederate	could
be	 persuaded	 to	 pay	 him	 homage,	 making	 him	 Emperor	 of	 India	 –	 from	 the
Himalayas	to	the	southern	seas.	Dhaumya	predicted	Yudhishtra	would	win	easily,
as	 he	 always	 followed	 dharma.	 As	 an	 additional	 guarantee,	 they	 met	 with	 an
astrologer,	who	threw	cowry	shells	on	the	ground,	did	some	obscure	calculations,
moved	a	few	shells	from	one	box	to	another,	and	then	predicted	Yudhishtra’s	win
as	 a	 foregone	 conclusion	 since	 all	 the	 planets	 favoured	 him.	 Finally,	 the	 Priests
had	given	Yudhishtra	an	amulet	to	wear	as	a	success	charm.	When	he	entered	the
Hastinapura	 palace,	 accompanied	 by	 his	 brothers,	 there	 was	 some	 gossip	 and
comment	about	the	amulet,	prominent	among	the	pearl	and	diamond	jewellery	he

wore.
***

After	 the	 trial	 throws,	 with	 Yudhishtra	 winning	 most	 of	 the	 plays	 and	 Shakuni
getting	 only	 a	 few	 points,	 the	 game	 began	 in	 earnest,	 based	 on	 throws	 and	 the
movement	of	coins	–	calling	for	a	mixture	of	skill	and	luck,	rather	like	life	itself.
“Your	 Highness,	 the	 game	 now	 begins.	 Let	 us	 set	 the	 wager,”	 Shakuni	 said,
looking	blandly	at	Suyodhana.
“I	place	my	pearl	necklace,”	Yudhishtra	said.	Karna	smirked,	irritating	the	other
Pandavas.
“I	do	the	same,”	Suyodhana	said	calmly,	unclasping	his	pearl	necklace	and	placing
it	near	the	board.
The	dice	started	rolling.
***

Dhritarashtra	 sat	 listening	 to	 the	 commentary	 from	 his	 scribe	 and	 secretary,
Sanjaya.	He	wanted	his	son	to	win.	He	was	relieved	Gandhari	had	not	appeared
yet.	She	had	always	been	set	against	the	game.	It	was	he	who	had	encouraged	his
son	 to	 play,	 saying	 it	 was	 an	 accomplishment	 required	 of	 a	 Kshatriya.	 She	 had
gone	to	the	temple	to	feed	the	poor.	Not	to	be	outdone,	Kunti	had	followed	her.	Let
them	remain	there,	the	King	thought	chuckling.	The	women	had	no	business	in	the
sabha	after	all.	It	was	the	realm	of	men.	Bhishma	and	his	new	ideas!
“Aha,	I	win!”	cried	Shakuni	with	unconcealed	glee	as	the	crowd	craned	to	see	the
result	of	the	first	throw.
Dhritarashtra	 smiled	 to	 himself.	 ‘Gandhari,	 you	 were	 dead	 against	 dicing.	 Now
see	 how	 easily	 our	 son	 is	 pulling	 the	 rug	 out	 from	 under	 Yudhishtra’s	 feet.’
Shakuni	was	a	resourceful	man,	thought	Dhritarashtra	when	more	applause	rippled
through	 the	 sabha	as	 the	 dice	 obeyed	 the	 foreigner	 again.	 He	 wondered	 for	 the
thousandth	 time	 why	 his	 wife	 disliked	 her	 brother	 so	 much.	 He	 was	 handing	 the
kingdom	to	Suyodhana	on	a	platter.	Men	played	to	win	while	the	women	went	to
the	 temple	 to	 pray.	 Dhritarashtra	 sat	 in	 silence,	 willing	 the	 dice	 to	 roll	 in

Shakuni’s	favour.
***

As	a	reluctant	sun	lazily	rose	over	the	mist-covered	trees,	a	man	galloped	towards
the	capital	of	Sindh.	He	had	ridden	for	two	days	almost	without	a	break.	His	back
was	sore	and	his	joints	ached,	but	he	knew	he	had	to	get	his	message	to	the	King.
When	he	reached	the	city	gates,	he	slowed	to	a	trot	to	appear	inconspicuous.	Then
he	 dismounted	 and	 began	 weaving	 his	 way	 through	 the	 busy	 streets,	 leading	 his
horse	as	he	pushed	forward	to	the	palace.	He	wiped	the	perspiration	from	his	face
with	 the	 tail	 of	 his	 turban	 and	 looked	 longingly	 at	 the	 wayside	 inns	 where	 men
were	resting	on	charpoys,	sipping	cold	milk	or	wine,	under	the	shade	of	the	trees.
He	 was	 tired	 unto	 death	 and	 longed	 to	 sleep	 for	 a	 hundred	 years.	 But	 the
information	 he	 carried	 was	 explosive	 enough	 to	 destroy	 the	 sleep	 of	 many
important	men	across	India.
When	 he	 reached	 the	 fort	 gate,	 the	 guards	 kept	 him	 waiting	 while	 they	 made
various	 entries.	 They	 asked	 him	 irrelevant	 questions	 while	 his	 eyes	 scanned	 the
palace	 courtyard.	 It	 seemed	 almost	 deserted.	 “Is	 His	 Highness	 not	 present?”	 he
finally	asked.
The	guards	lifted	their	heads	and	looked	at	each	other.	“Do	you	not	know?	King
Jayadratha	has	gone	to	Hastinapura.”
“Hastinapura!	 Why	 the	 hell…”	 he	 swallowed	 his	 words	 lest	 he	 say	 something
insulting	about	his	King.
“Who	are	we	to	question	the	King	about	his	movements?	I	think	he	has	gone	to	a
dice	 game.	 If	 you	 have	 anything	 to	 convey	 to	 His	 Highness,	 you	 can	 give	 us	 the
message	and	we	will	make	sure	he	gets	it	once	he	is	back.	That	will	cost	you	two
silver	 coins,”	 the	 younger	 of	 the	 guards	 told	 him	 officiously.	 But	 the	 messenger
shook	his	head	and	starting	walking	out.
“Hey	 you,	 you	 said	 you	 have	 a	 message	 for	 the	 King.	 I	 can	 pass	 it	 on	 for	 one
coin,”	the	guard	cried	out,	but	the	messenger	had	already	mounted	his	horse.
‘Fool!	Can	I	tell	him	Durjaya	has	slipped	into	Gandhara	with	hundreds	of	his	men
and	 is	 being	 trained	 to	 wreak	 havoc	 on	 our	 cities?’	 the	 spy	 thought	 as	 he	 turned
north-east,	 towards	 Hastinapura.	 How	 typical!	 When	 the	 country	 was	 about	 to

burn,	the	rulers	were	playing	dice.	To	hell	with	being	inconspicuous.	He	kicked
his	mount	with	a	vengeance.	The	frothing	horse,	carrying	the	bitter	and	tired	man,
sent	everyone	in	its	path	scurrying	for	safety	as	it	galloped	towards	Hastinapura.
***

Yudhishtra	touched	his	amulet.	In	the	trial	throws,	the	foreigner	had	not	appeared
to	 be	 a	 skilled	 player.	 Perhaps	 it	 was	 just	 beginner’s	 luck,	 he	 thought	 a	 little
uneasily.	Lifting	his	head	he	said,	“I	wager	all	my	golden	chariots.”
Shakuni	rubbed	the	dice	together.	“Golden	chariots,	Your	Highness?	That	would
be	somewhat	unfair.	Hastinapura	has	far	more	golden	chariots	than	Indraprastha.”
“I	add	my	corps	of	trained	elephants,”	Yudhishtra	answered	immediately.	Nothing
in	his	demeanour	showed	that	his	heart	was	thudding	in	his	chest.
The	dice	rolled	again.
“Bad	 luck,	 Your	 Highness!	 Your	 elephants	 and	 chariots	 are	 now	 Suyodhana’s,”
Shakuni	said	with	a	smile.
Yudhishtra	 cursed	 under	 his	 breath.	 How	 was	 it	 possible?	 No	 one	 had	 ever
worsted	him	in	a	game	of	dice.	Arjuna	whispered	to	his	brother	to	stop.	They	had
already	lost	a	major	part	of	their	army.	But	Yudhishtra,	stung	by	the	smug	look	on
the	 Kauravas’	 faces,	 lost	 his	 usual	 calm	 and	 staked	 his	 mansions,	 horses,	 gold,
diamonds,	 treasury,	 cows,	 all	 the	 villages	 in	 his	 kingdom,	 his	 armoury	 and	 the
wealth	of	his	merchants.
The	dice	rolled	again,	sweeping	everything	from	Yudhishtra’s	grasp	in	each	of	the
next	ten	throws.
“Stake	something	worthwhile	Prince,	instead	of	a	horse	or	a	cow	at	a	time.	Then
you	can	win	big.	Suyodhana	is	staking	his	position	as	Crown	Prince.	If	he	loses,
you	will	be	Crown	Prince	of	Hastinapura,	and	King	when	the	time	comes.	He	will
go	away	as	a	mendicant.	Match	that	if	you	dare.	Win	and	you	gain	an	empire;	if
you	lose…?”
Shakuni’s	 smiling	 words	 provoked	 the	 gambler	 in	 Yudhishtra.	 He	 touched	 his
amulet	again	and	took	a	deep	breath.	“I	wager	my	palace	in	Indraprastha.”

The	dice	rolled	for	the	eleventh	time.
“Oh!	It	is	not	your	day,	Highness…	you	lose	again!”	Shakuni	exclaimed	in	mock
dismay.
Arjuna	 began	 to	 look	 grim.	 The	 smiles	 had	 vanished	 from	 the	 faces	 of	 Bhima,
Nakula	 and	 Sahadeva.	 Yudhishtra	 sat	 pale	 and	 withdrawn.	 There	 was	 pindrop
silence	in	the	sabha.	Suyodhana	was	overcome	by	sudden	pity	for	his	cousin.	He
had	got	his	revenge.	The	Pandavas	had	nothing	left.	They	would	have	to	live	on
his	charity.	He	had	reduced	his	cousins	to	petty	Royals	without	spilling	a	drop	of
blood.	He	stood	up	to	end	the	game.
Shakuni	 saw	 it	 and	 tensed.	 The	 fool	 was	 going	 to	 spoil	 all	 his	 plans.	 But
fortunately	for	the	foreigner,	Yudhishtra	lifted	his	head	and	said	clearly,	“Cousin,
do	not	insult	me	by	stopping	the	game	now.	I	am	sure	I	will	win	in	the	end.”	The
gambler	in	Yudhishtra	had	taken	possession	of	him.	Nothing	mattered	but	the	next
roll	of	the	dice.	He	knew	with	utter	certainty	that	his	luck	would	turn.
Suyodhana	 sat	 back,	 surprised	 by	 his	 cousin’s	 uncharacteristic	 words	 and
rashness.	He	knew	there	was	no	winning	for	the	Pandavas	that	day,	no	matter	how
skilled	a	player	his	cousin	was.
Sushasana	whispered	in	his	ear,	“Why	do	you	want	to	stop	now?	We	are	winning.”
Suyodhana	 looked	 at	 his	 brother,	 who	 appeared	 almost	 drunk	 with	 vicarious
pleasure.	It	was	evident	Sushasana	had	been	pouring	himself	a	drink	every	time	he
went	out.	“Go	and	sleep	it	off	in	your	chamber	and	do	not	create	a	scene	here,”
Suyodhana	said	quietly.	But	Sushasana	only	gave	him	a	crooked	grin	in	reply.
“I	wager	my	brother,	Nakula.”	Yudhishtra’s	voice	shook.
There	 was	 a	 moment’s	 stunned	 silence,	 and	 then	 the	 sabha	 erupted	 in	 talk	 and
discussion.	 The	 dice	 rolled.	 Sushasana	 laughed	 openly	 when	 Yudhishtra	 lost
again.
“One	 more	 throw	 and	 you	 could	 win	 back	 everything	 you	 have	 lost,	 as	 well	 as
gain	 the	 throne	 of	 Hastinapura.	 But	 do	 you	 dare?”	 Shakuni	 asked	 Yudhishtra
casually.

Arjuna	placed	a	restraining	hand	on	his	brother’s	shoulder	saying,	“Enough!	Let	us
go.”
“No.	How	can	I	leave	Nakula	a	slave	to	Duryodhana?	We	have	to	win	him	back,”
Yudhishtra	replied,	his	eyes	glittering	with	the	fever	of	his	addiction.	He	threw	the
dice	with	trembling	hands.	Nakula	was	lost.	But	Yudhishtra	was	beyond	counsel
now.	He	rolled	the	dice	again	saying,	“I	wager	Sahadeva,”	and	promptly	lost	him
too.
“Fools!	A	foreigner	is	rolling	the	dice	and	you	rulers	of	India	are	gambling	away
your	country?	Stop	this	nonsense!”	Kripa,	who	was	watching	the	game,	could	no
longer	control	himself.
“There	is	nothing	is	wrong	in	gambling.	Our	scriptures	permit	it.	It	is	the	dharma
of	 a	 King	 to	 play	 at	 dice.”	 Dhaumya	 could	 not	 resist	 showing	 off	 his	 superior
knowledge	of	the	scriptures.	Rarely	did	he	get	a	chance	to	get	back	at	Kripa.	They
glared	at	each	other.
Kripa	 laughed.	 “Fools!	 Idiots!”	 he	 kept	 muttering	 as	 the	 dice	 rolled	 again	 and
again…	and	Yudhishtra	lost	Arjuna,	Bhima,	and	even	himself.	He	had	nothing	left
to	wager.	He	and	his	brothers	were	now	Suyodhana’s	slaves.
Shakuni	 turned	 to	 Dhaumya.	 “Tell	 me,	 great	 scholar,	 as	 per	 the	 smritis,	 does	 a
master	have	the	right	to	decide	what	costume	his	slaves	should	wear?”
Dhaumya	squirmed,	but	he	did	not	have	a	choice.	“Whatever	the	master	wishes,
the	slave	must	wear,	but…”
“Thank	 you.”	 Shakuni	 interrupted	 the	 Priest.	 He	 looked	 at	 Suyodhana	 in	 open
invitation	to	take	his	revenge.
A	few	days	before,	Suyodhana	had	stood	in	Yudhishtra’s	sabha	naked,	 while	the
whole	world	laughed	at	him.	The	wheel	had	turned	full	circle.	The	Pandavas	had
become	his	slaves	and	he	could	do	anything	with	them.	“Remove	your	clothes	and
stand	there,”	he	ordered	his	cousins	while	the	assembly	sat	in	stunned	silence.
The	Pandavas	hesitated,	but	knew	they	had	to	obey.	One	by	one,	they	took	off	their
clothes	 and	 ornaments.	 Finally,	 they	 stood	 in	 their	 loincloths,	 shamed	 and
humiliated.	 Karna	 and	 Aswathama’s	 mocking	 laughter	 filled	 their	 ears,	 just	 as

their	mirth	had	burned	in	Suyodhana’s.	All	the	Kaurava	brothers	followed	suit.
Shakuni	 was	 watching	 Suyodhana	 nervously.	 He	 feared	 his	 nephew	 would
magnanimously	return	everything	to	his	cousins	now	that	his	thirst	for	revenge	had
been	 satisfied.	 He	 quickly	 made	 his	 master	 move.	 “Would	 you	 like	 to	 wager
anything	on	a	last	throw,	Yudhishtra?”
The	Pandava	did	not	miss	 that	the	Gandhara	Prince	was	now	calling	him	by	his
name.	He	was	a	slave	and	people	could	call	him	anything	they	liked.	How	could
astrology	be	so	wrong?	He	had	followed	everything	the	Priests	had	said	and	still
Suyodhana	had	won.	“There	is	nothing	left	to	wager,”	he	said,	his	voice	cracking
with	emotion.
“Have	you	forgotten	your	most	prized	possession,	Yudhishtra?”	Shakuni	gazed	at
his	 opponent	 in	 surprise.	 “You	 could	 win	 back	 everything	 by	 staking	 her.	 She	 is
your	 lucky	 charm,	 is	 she	 not?	 Your	 astrologers	 cannot	 be	 wrong.	 It	 is	 a	 science
after	all.	So	far	luck	has	favoured	me	but	one	right	throw	and	you	could	win	back
not	 only	 what	 you	 have	 lost,	 but	 gain	 the	 kingdom	 of	 Hastinapura	 too.	 Who	 can
predict	how	the	dice	will	roll	the	next	time?”
“He	is	afraid,	Uncle,”	Sushasana	said,	slurring	his	words.	As	an	afterthought	he
added,	“Poor	slave”.
Yudhishtra	could	bear	the	humiliation	no	longer.	“I	wager	my	wife,”	he	said	softly,
his	heart	hammering	in	his	chest.	He	had	to	try	one	more	throw.	Surely,	the	Gods
would	smile	on	his	courage?
The	words	hit	Arjuna	like	a	punch	in	his	face.	How	dared	Yudhishtra	do	this?	He
wanted	to	scream	that	it	was	he	who	had	won	Draupadi	with	his	skill	and	valour.
His	brother	had	merely	followed	their	mother’s	wishes,	justifying	his	action	based
on	 some	 obscure	 smritis.	 What	 right	 had	 he	 to	 gamble	 Draupadi	 and	 play	 his
dangerous	games?	Yet,	when	he	looked	at	the	broken	man	before	him,	he	could	not
bring	himself	to	ask	that	cruel	question.
“The	 wife	 who	 is	 common	 to	 all	 of	 you…	 am	 I	 right?”	 Shakuni	 asked,	 gently
rubbing	salt	into	their	wounded	hearts.	Not	one	of	the	Pandavas	replied.
Vidhura	was	unable	to	stand	by	in	silence	any	longer.	In	desperation,	he	appealed

to	the	Grand	Regent.	“Sir,	stop	this	before	it	gets	worse.”
But	Bhishma	just	shook	his	head	and	said,	“If	a	man	is	a	fool,	not	even	God	can
save	 him.	 How	 can	 we	 entrust	 a	 kingdom	 to	 a	 gambler?	 Nobody	 forced	 him	 to
play.	He	played	because	of	greed	and	he	is	now	paying	the	price.	That	is	nature’s
way	of	eliminating	the	undeserving.	Do	not	interfere.”
“Guru,”	Shakuni	addressed	Dhaumya	again,	“this	slave	wants	to	wager	his	wife,
who	 is	 also	 wife	 to	 all	 his	 brothers.	 Can	 a	 man	 wager	 his	 wife?	 What	 do	 your
smritis	say?”
Dhaumya	 wished	 he	 could	 turn	 and	 flee	 the	 accursed	 place,	 but	 knew	 he	 had	 to
answer	 the	 question	 or	 lose	 face.	 “Hmm…	 if	 a	 man	 is	 in	 distress,	 he	 may	 sell,
pawn	 or	 stake	 his	 house,	 wife,	 children,	 and	 cows,	 in	 that	 order.	 A	 woman	 is
essentially	not	entitled	to	freedom,	as	she	is	her	husband’s	property.	But	that…”
“Thank	you.”	Shakuni	bowed	to	Dhaumya	before	he	could	go	into	an	explanation
to	suit	Yudhishtra.
But	 Dhaumya	 was	 not	 concerned	 about	 Yudhishtra	 losing	 his	 crown.	 It	 was	 a
temporary	 setback.	 When	 one	 ruler	 went,	 another	 came	 to	 fill	 his	 place.	 Kings
were	merely	puppets	in	the	hands	of	the	Priests.	Now	that	this	puppet	had	become
unusable,	 it	 was	 time	 to	 find	 a	 new	 one	 to	 play	 the	 game.	 So	 he	 continued
watching	the	unfolding	drama	with	interest,	hoping	he	would	not	be	called	upon	to
make	any	further	statements.	Silence	would	serve	him	best.
“We	accept	your	wager,”	Shakuni	said.
Kripa	laughed	again,	irritating	everyone.	Truly,	one	cannot	save	a	fool,	he	thought.
“Twelve!”	cried	Shakuni.
“Eight,”	Yudhishtra	said	in	a	shaking	voice.
Yudhishtra	 said	 a	 fervent	 prayer	 as	 the	 dice	 spun	 viciously.	 The	 words	 were
wasted.	 In	 the	 duel	 between	 a	 lucky	 amulet	 and	 the	 skill	 developed	 over	 three
decades	of	dedicated	practise,	the	latter	won	handsomely.
“Aha,	Draupadi	is	ours,”	Shakuni	 said	in	 triumph.	 Sushasana	 got	 up	 eagerly	 but

rather	unsteadily.
“Guru,	what	caste	does	a	slave	belongs	to?	Are	they	above	Sutas?”	Shakuni	asked
with	a	humble	look,	craving	enlightenment.
Dhaumya	looked	at	the	Gandhara	Prince	and	said	weakly,	“Slaves	do	not	have	any
caste.	They	are	Untouchables.”
“Really!”	exclaimed	Shakuni	unctuously.	“So	you	say	they	are	now	Untouchables?
That	 Arjuna	 is	 a	 slave?	 That	 big-bellied	 Bhima	 is	 a	 slave,	 as	 are	 the	 handsome
twins?	 And,	 of	 course,	 this	 Son	 of	 Dharma	 is	 now	 an	 Untouchable	 too?	 Do	 you
advise	 us	 to	 have	 the	 palace	 cleaned	 with	 cow	 dung?	 Now	Karna	 will	 have	 to
take	a	bath	if	he	touches	any	of	the	Pandavas.”
Expressing	the	hurt	and	bitterness	only	a	man	spurned	by	the	woman	he	loves	can
feel,	Karna	said,	“Bring	out	the	woman	who	shares	her	bed	with	five	men.	Let	us
all	 see	 what	 our	 slave	 looks	 like.”	 Draupadi’s	 words,	 ‘I	 will	 not	 marry	 a	 Suta’
and	her	taunt	to	him	to	drive	away	the	naked	Suyodhana	in	his	chariot,	returned	to
sear	Karna’s	mind.
Suyodhana	 looked	 at	 Karna	 in	 surprise.	 His	 heart	 went	 out	 to	 his	 friend.	 How
deeply	 Karna	 must	 have	 suffered	 to	 be	 so	 uncharacteristically	 cruel.	 He	 caught
Aswathama’s	eye.	The	Brahmin	was	shaking	his	head,	trying	to	tell	him	they	had
gone	too	far.
“Have	you	forgotten	her	laughter,	nephew?	Have	you	forgotten	the	day	you	stood
unclothed	and	ridiculed?”	Shakuni	whispered	to	Suyodhana.
His	uncle’s	words	poured	oil	on	the	embers	of	the	fire	in	Suyodhana’s	mind.	The
flames	leapt	up	again.	“Bring	Draupadi	here,”	he	commanded.
Vidhura	pleaded	again	with	Bhishma	to	stop	the	insanity.	But	the	Grand	Regent	sat
in	unmoved	silence.
***

“What	is	he	doing,	Sanjaya?”	Dhritarashtra	gripped	his	scribe’s	wrist.
“Your	 son	 wishes	 to	 drag	 your	 nephew’s	 wife	 to	 the	 sabha,	 Your	 Highness,”

Sanjaya	 replied	 in	 his	 characteristic	 flat	 tone,	 not	 offering	 any	 opinion.	 His	 job
was	to	describe	what	he	saw	to	the	blind	King,	not	to	comment	on	affairs	of	State
and	the	actions	of	those	more	important	than	he.
The	King’s	tortured	thoughts	roiled	in	his	brain.	Where	had	Gandhari	gone?	What
was	 she	 doing	 in	 the	 temple	 when	 she	 was	 needed	 here?	 Why	 was	 Suyodhana
doing	this?	Surely,	it	was	because	of	the	company	he	kept.	He	was	doing	it	for	that
Suta,	 or	 perhaps	 that	 Brahmin	 boy.	 ‘Should	 I	 stop	 this	 farce	 and	 risk	 losing
everything	 Shakuni	 has	 won	 for	 my	 son?’	 he	 wondered	 frantically.	 Why	 was	 the
wise,	know-it-all	Bhishma	silent?	The	King	tightened	his	grip	on	Sanjaya’s	wrist
and	gazed	at	the	sabha	with	unseeing	eyes.
***

“That	 boy	 has	 style.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 matter	 of	 time	 before	 Dwaraka	 falls,”	 Takshaka
said	 as	 he	 watched	 the	 vanishing	 column	 of	 dust	 from	 a	 rocky	 overhang	 in	 the
jungle.	Kaliya	agreed	with	his	leader	as	usual.	The	army	led	by	Ekalavya,	Shalva,
and	Dhantavakra,	was	rushing	towards	Dwaraka.
Vasuki,	 leaning	 on	 his	 crooked	 staff	 nearby,	 kept	 scanning	 the	 horizon	 with	 his
shortsighted	eyes,	his	hand	lifted	against	the	glare	of	the	setting	sun.	The	heat	was
oppressive	 and	 two	 channels	 of	 sweat	 ran	 down	 Vasuki’s	 cragged	 face.	 “There
they	 come!”	 he	 exclaimed	 suddenly.	 Takshaka	 and	 Kaliya	 turned	 towards	 the
direction	Vasuki	pointed	to.
“Krishna,	your	story	ends	today,”	Takshaka	laughed.
Vasuki,	 gazing	 intently	 at	 the	 approaching	 column,	 did	 not	 join	 in	 the	 Naga
leader’s	 joy.	 The	 speck	 on	 the	 Eastern	 horizon	 soon	 grew	 into	 a	 column	 of
galloping	cavalry.	Takshaka	raised	his	sword	high	in	the	air.	Its	tip	caught	the	red
rays	of	the	setting	sun.	His	men,	hidden	in	the	bushes	and	rocks	behind	him,	saw
the	signal	and	grew	alert.	He	heard	them	getting	ready.	Takshaka	stood	unmoving,
with	 his	 sword	 raised	 high.	 He	 knew	 his	 men	 were	 watching	 his	 every	 move.
Vasuki	and	Kaliya	clambered	down	from	the	rock.
“Remember	 Khandiva!”	 Takshaka	 shouted,	 pointing	 with	 his	 sword	 at	 the	 fast
approaching	cavalry.	He	smiled	at	the	anger	he	knew	he	had	aroused	in	the	ranks.
Dramatically,	 he	 raised	 both	 hands.	 “Success	 to	 the	 revolution!”	 he	 yelled.

Hundreds	 of	 throats	 answered	 the	 war	 cry	 as	 Takshaka	 jumped	 down	 from	 the
rock	and	rolled	into	his	hiding	place.
As	darkness	crept	in,	they	waited	with	drawn	bowstrings,	for	Krishna	and	his	men
to	reach	them.
***

Balarama	sat	cross-legged	in	his	prayer	room.	His	wife	Revati	stood	outside	the
closed	 door,	 ignoring	 the	 bawling	 of	 the	 two-year-old	 Valsala.	 Where	 was
Krishna?	 Had	 he	 been	 here,	 there	 would	 not	 have	 been	 any	 dilemma.	 She	 could
hear	the	murmuring	of	members	of	the	Yadava	Council,	outside	the	chamber.	They
had	been	waiting	since	morning	for	Balarama	to	make	a	decision.	She	knew	the
mental	torture	her	husband	was	suffering.	For	a	man	who	believed	in	non-violence
and	loved	the	people	he	ruled	more	than	anything	else	in	the	world,	it	was	a	tough
call.
Revati	picked	up	little	Valsala	and	tried	to	pacify	her.	On	a	normal	day,	she	would
have	taken	the	child	to	the	window	and	distracted	her	with	the	sights	and	sounds
of	the	bustling	city	outside.	But	today	was	not	a	normal	day.	A	sense	of	foreboding
hung	in	the	air.	The	usually	busy	streets	were	deserted.	Dwaraka	was	under	siege.
Revati	kissed	her	daughter,	pulling	the	little	fingers	gently	to	make	her	giggle.	An
elephant	 trumpeted	 from	 the	 far	 end	 of	 the	 fort	 and	 the	 call	 was	 answered	 by
another.	 Valsala	 tried	 to	 wriggle	 out	 of	 her	 mother’s	 arms.	 She	 was	 fond	 of
elephants.	The	mahouts	would	be	preparing	the	war	elephants,	Revati	thought,	her
heart	sinking	at	the	thought	of	war.
The	 door	 of	 the	 prayer	 room	 opened	 suddenly.	 Revati	 gasped	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 her
husband	 standing	 with	 his	 mace	 over	 his	 shoulder.	 She	 rushed	 forward,	 tears
blinding	her.	“You	said	you	believed	in	non-violence.	You	said	you	would	never
touch	any	weapon	again.	Then	why	are	you	doing	this?”
“What	choice	does	a	man	of	honour	have,	Revati?”	he	asked	her	as	he	put	down
the	 mace	 and	 picked	 up	 his	 daughter,	 kissing	 the	 child	 on	 both	 cheeks.	 The	 girl
tugged	at	his	earrings	and	smiled	happily.
Revati	took	Valsala	from	her	husband.	He	embraced	her	as	she	pressed	her	head
to	his	broad	chest,	and	stifled	a	sob.	She	knew	there	was	no	power	in	heaven	that

could	turn	him	from	his	purpose.
“If	I	do	not	fight,	they	will	destroy	the	city.	I	do	not	want	a	war,	but	as	the	leader
of	 the	 Yadavas,	 I	 cannot	 leave	 my	 people	 to	 the	 mercy	 of	 the	 Nishada	 army.	 I
detest	war	and	violence,	but	I	am	not	a	coward.	Non-violence	has	to	be	a	position
of	strength.	It	cannot	be	a	filthy	cloth	to	cover	the	shame	of	cowardice.	I	will	not
indulge	 in	 peace	 talks	 until	 we	 are	 in	 a	 position	 to	 win.	 Non-violence	 is	 my
personal	belief.	It	should	not	stand	in	the	way	of	what	is	good	for	my	people.	God
protect	us	all,	Revati.”
She	saw	him	walking	away.	Valsala	wriggled	down	and	ran	behind	her	father.	He
stooped	to	caress	her	innocently	smiling	face.
“Then	why	are	you	not	wearing	your	armour?”	Revati	cried.	Her	heart	felt	like	a
heavy	stone	in	her	chest.
“I	 do	 not	 believe	 in	 false	 protection.	 If	 I	 have	 ruled	 my	 country	 well,	 loved	 my
people,	and	never	done	anything	to	earn	the	wrath	of	those	men	standing	outside
our	fort	gates	and	baying	for	our	blood,	I	will	return	alive	and	victorious.	Nothing
will	touch	me.”
Revati	 felt	 weak.	 Everything	 looked	 blurred	 through	 her	 tears.	 ‘Krishna,	 where
are	you?	Why	have	you	left	your	brother	alone	when	you	are	most	needed?’	she
silently	cried.
“Daughter,	take	care	of	your	mother	and	your	two	naughty	brothers,”	Revati	heard
Balarama	 tell	 Valsala.	 As	 her	 little	 daughter	 ran	 to	 her,	 she	 saw	 him	 vanish
through	the	door.	Revati	entered	the	puja	room	where	her	husband	had	spent	the
whole	morning	and	shut	the	door.	Her	daughter	ran	to	play	with	the	puja	bell.	Its
tinkling	sounded	incongruous	to	her	ears.	She	could	hear	cheering	and	war	cries
outside.	Why	had	war	come	to	Dwaraka?	After	they	had	left	Vrindavan,	life	had
been	peaceful	and	good	in	this	coastal	city.	Life	had	been	idyllic	in	Vrindavan	too,
until	her	husband	entered	politics	and	became	the	leader	of	the	Yadavas.	When	did
he	 get	 the	 fancy	 idea	 that	 he	 was	 called	 to	 serve	 his	 country	 and	 build	 an	 ideal
city?	Why	did	men	have	such	impossible	dreams?	Why	could	they	not	be	happy
with	 their	 families?	 Why	 did	 they	 play	 dangerous	 games	 and	 bring	 home	 misery
and	tears?

Revati	prostrated	herself	on	the	floor,	her	forehead	touching	the	ground.	She	did
not	want	to	look	up	and	see	the	idol	of	Lord	Rama	and	his	consort	Sita,	for	whose
sake	 Rama	 and	 his	 brother	 had	 destroyed	 cities	 and	 slain	 thousands.	 The	 idol
looked	 dangerously	 similar	 to	 her	 brother-in-law,	 Krishna.	 Why	 were	 the
Nishadas	attacking	their	city?	If	any	ruler	had	shown	concern	for	the	plight	of	the
Nishadas	 and	 other	 unfortunate	 people,	 it	 was	 Balarama.	 He	 was	 the	 only	 ruler
who	genuinely	cared	about	them.	Yet,	now	they	were	repaying	his	goodness	with
war.	She	felt	bitter	and	cursed	the	Nishada	leader	who	had	brought	bloodshed	to
her	door.	If	Krishna	did	not	come	soon,	everything	would	be	lost.
As	she	heard	the	massive	doors	of	the	fort	creaking	open	and	the	thunderous	cries
of	 Har	 Har	 Mahadev	 echoing	 from	 her	 husband’s	 army,	 she	 shut	 her	 eyes	 and
rested	 her	 cheek	 on	 the	 cold	 marble	 floor.	 Her	 daughter	 played	 on,	 jingling	 the
bell	innocently	before	the	idols	and	throwing	flowers	in	mock	imitation	of	a	puja.
She	 was	 fascinated	 by	 the	 monkey	 god	 Hanuman	 and	 kept	 throwing	 the	 best
flowers	at	his	feet.	The	war	cries	outside	the	window	rose	to	a	crescendo	and	then
gradually	died	away…
***

In	the	South,	the	Kings	of	the	Southern	Confederate	stood	around	the	bed	of	a	frail,
old	man.	Uthayan,	Karna’s	old	rival,	was	now	the	Chera	King,	and	it	was	for	his
coronation	that	the	powerful	Asura	Kings	had	assembled	in	Muzaris.	Their	Guru,
Parashurama,	 had	 still	 to	 recover	 completely	 from	 his	 long	 coma,	 but	 when	 the
physicians	 announced	 the	 Guru	 had	 awoken	 and	 was	 showing	 signs	 of	 life,	 the
Kings	of	the	Confederate	had	rushed	to	his	bedside.
Guru	 Parashurama	 opened	 his	 eyes	 painfully	 and	 the	 Kings	 heaved	 a	 collective
sigh	of	relief.	Uthayan	moved	forward	and	the	glassy	eyes	of	the	old	man	locked
onto	his	face.	Parashurama	was	trying	to	say	something.	The	newly	crowned	King
moved	 close	 to	 his	 Guru	 with	 joy	 in	 his	 heart.	 ‘I	 am	 blessed,’	 he	 thought,	 ‘for
among	 all	 these	 Kings,	 he	 had	 chosen	 to	 speak	 to	 me	 first.’	 Uthayan	 strained	 to
hear	 what	 the	 Guru	 was	 trying	 to	 say.	 But	 when	 he	 deciphered	 the	 whispered
words,	his	face	became	as	dark	as	midnight.
“Karna…	where	is	my	Karna?	I	want	to	see	my	Karna,”	the	Guru	kept	mumbling.
The	assembly	of	Kings	became	agitated.	The	greatest	Kings	of	the	South	stood	at

his	bedside	and	the	Guru’s	first	words	were	about	that	Suta,	that	cheat	who	had
insulted	them	and	escaped!	It	made	them	all	look	ridiculous.	They	walked	out	 of
the	 room,	 cursing	 the	 physicians	 who	 had	 made	 their	 Guru	 insane	 with	 their
medicines.
“Perhaps	the	Guru	meant	we	should	bring	Karna	to	him.	That	bloody	Suta	has	to
be	taught	a	lesson,”	the	King	of	Vatapi	said.
The	idea	caught	like	wildfire.	Yes,	their	Guru	wanted	revenge.	They	would	drag
the	low	caste	imposter	to	the	South	and	make	an	example	of	him.	The	old	King	of
Kalinga	 advised	 caution,	 but	 there	 were	 too	 many	 young	 hot-bloods	 among	 the
Southern	Confederate	rulers	and	no	one	wished	to	heed	his	unpalatable	advice.
“Who	is	afraid	of	a	Suta,	his	friend	Duryodhana,	or	even	that	old	man	Bhishma?”
asked	 Uthayan.	 That	 was	 enough	 to	 bolster	 the	 fragile	 egos	 of	 the	 proud	 Kings.
There	were	angry	murmurs	in	the	sabha.
“Hastinapura	 is	 very	 far	 away.	 Are	 our	 coffers	 brimming	 with	 wealth	 that	 you
wish	 to	 contemplate	 such	 an	 expedition?”	 the	 Kalinga	 King	 asked.	 Being	 the
northernmost	kingdom	of	the	Confederate,	his	land	and	people	would	be	the	first
to	pay	the	price	if	something	went	wrong.
Uthayan	understood	the	reasons	for	the	King’s	caution.	He	moved	closer	and	said,
“Your	Highness,	this	is	why	we	have	taxes.	The	people	will	willingly	pay	more	in
taxes	for	the	sake	of	dharma.	Do	we	not	owe	at	least	that	to	our	Guru?	It	is	a	small
price	to	pay	to	serve	the	man	who	taught	us	right	from	wrong.	That	Suta	insulted
all	of	us	and	we	did	nothing.	Now,	our	Guru	has	asked	for	him.	By	Lord	Vishnu,	I
swear	we	will	get	that	arrogant	Suta!”
The	Kalinga	King	still	hesitated.	Uthayan	stared	at	him	intently.	He	could	see	the
old	man	was	worried	about	the	armour	he	had	bestowed	upon	Karna.	Perhaps	he
was	 wondering	 if	 the	 Sun	 God	 had	 been	 wrong	 about	 Karna’s	 worthiness?
Uthayan	sensed	it	was	time	to	move	or	he	would	lose	the	chance	to	get	even	with
the	upstart	Karna.	The	flame	of	revenge	Karna	had	ignited	years	ago,	still	raged	in
Uthayan’s	mind.
“Bring	 the	 holy	 lamp	 from	 the	 temple	 of	 Lord	 Vamanamurthy,”	 Uthayan
commanded.	Immediately,	servants	ran	to	fetch	it.	When	it	arrived,	he	placed	it	in

the	centre	of	the	sabha	and	lit	it.
As	 the	 Priests	 chanted	 holy	 mantras,	 the	 Kings	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate
stepped	forward	one	by	one,	and	placing	their	palms	over	the	flame,	took	a	vow	in
the	 name	 of	 religion	 and	 dharma,	 to	 capture	 Karna	 and	 drag	 him	 to	 the	 feet	 of
Guru	Parashurama.	 As	the	sabha	filled	with	 the	 pungent	 smell	 of	singeing	flesh,
riders	set	out,	galloping	towards	the	great	cities	of	the	Confederate.	They	carried
only	 one	 message:	 Guru	 Parashurama	 commands	 all	 the	 Kings	 of	 the
Confederate	to	place	their	forces	at	the	disposal	of	the	Council	of	Kings.	The
mission	before	this	special	force	is	the	invasion	of	Hastinapura;	the	crushing	of
the	northern	kingdoms;	and	the	capture	of	the	Suta,	Karna,	who	will	be	dragged
to	meet	his	fate	at	the	feet	of	the	divine	Guru.
‘Karna,	where	can	you	run	to	now?’	Uthayan	laughed	to	himself	as	he	gazed	at	the
warriors	assembling	near	the	Chera	fort.	The	thunderous	drumming	of	the	chendas
rolled	 around	 him,	 shaking	 the	 very	 ground	 he	 stood	 on.	 It	 was	 better	 his	 father
had	not	lived	to	see	this	day.	He	too,	would	have	talked	like	the	old	Kalinga	King,
advising	restraint	and	caution,	thought	Uthayan.	His	time	to	take	on	the	Suta	was	at
hand	and	nothing	was	going	to	stop	him.
***

Bhanumati	sat	in	her	chamber	with	Subhadra,	Draupadi,	and	the	children,	trying	to
understand	 what	 was	 happening	 in	 the	 dice	 game	 below.	 The	 faint	 sounds	 of
cheering,	as	well	as	despair,	came	to	her	ears.	Oblivious	to	the	drama	 unfolding
below,	Draupadi	and	Subhadra	sat	chatting.	Bhanumati	wondered	how	they	could
discuss	 the	 men	 they	 knew	 so	 casually.	 Draupadi	 was	 saying	 how	 boring
Yudhishtra	was,	that	she	could	make	Bhima	do	her	bidding	every	time,	and	how
handsome	 Nakula	 and	 Sahadeva	 were.	 Karna	 too,	 came	 under	 their	 scrutiny	 and
both	women	agreed	he	would	have	been	their	clear	favourite	if	only	he	had	been	a
Kshatriya.	 Judiciously,	 they	 avoided	 discussing	 Arjuna,	 their	 common	 husband.
Bhanumati	was	surprised	by	the	camaraderie	between	the	two	women	who	shared
the	same	man.	Even	after	so	many	years,	even	knowing	her	husband	was	faithful,
Bhanumati	 still	 could	 not	 control	 her	 racing	 heart	 whenever	 Suyodhana	 stole	 a
glance	at	Subhadra.
Why	had	the	sabha	gone	so	silent?	Why	was	that	mad	Brahmin,	Kripa,	laughing	so
loudly?	Then	Bhanumati	heard	something	that	made	her	heart	freeze.	She	looked	in

alarm	at	Draupadi,	still	chatting	animatedly	with	Subhadra.	She	could	clearly	hear
it	now	–	the	creaking	of	the	wooden	stairs.	She	could	hear	someone	approaching.
The	footsteps	stopped	outside	the	door.	Bhanumati	was	about	to	let	out	a	sigh	of
relief	 when	 there	 was	 a	 soft	 knocking.	 She	 looked	 up	 in	 sudden	 fear.	 Her	 heart
told	her	something	terrible	was	about	to	happen.	As	the	knocking	grew	louder	and
bolder,	she	closed	her	eyes,	trying	to	keep	the	tears	from	escaping.	The	knocking
turned	 into	 banging.	 A	 horse	 neighed	 in	 the	 street	 as	 the	 first	 tears	 fell	 into
Bhanumati’s	lap.
***

Shakuni	 looked	 at	 the	 fool	 who	 had	 gambled	 and	 lost	 everything,	 including	 his
wife.	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 sitting	 near	 him;	 his	 face	 pale	 and
withdrawn.	He	looked	at	the	Suta,	paying	back	every	insult	he	had	faced,	double
fold.	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 wearing	 a	 stony	 expression,	 refusing	 to
interfere.	 He	 looked	 at	 his	 mute	 brother-in-law,	 sitting	 on	 the	 throne	 of
Hastinapura,	 pretending	 to	 rule	 India.	 The	 foreigner	 looked	 towards	 the	 door,
expecting	 Sushasana	 to	 enter	 at	 any	 moment,	 dragging	 a	 screaming	 Draupadi	 by
her	 hair.	 He	 wanted	 to	 laugh	 aloud	 at	 the	 five	 impotent	 husbands	 who	 sat	 like
statues,	waiting	for	their	common	wife	to	be	stripped	in	public.	He	looked	at	the
Priests	 busy	 debating,	 always	 debating,	 the	 rights	 and	 wrongs	 of	 what	 was
happening.
‘Father,	it	is	done.’	Shakuni	smiled	smugly.	The	dice,	chiselled	from	the	bones	of
a	 long-dead	 King	 of	 Gandhara,	 was	 not	 going	 to	 stop	 rolling	 any	 time	 soon.	 He
could	visualize	clearly	the	apocalypse	that	 was	 fast	approaching;	 he	 could	smell
blood	and	see	death	and	destruction.	The	Great	War	was	near!	It	would	consume
everything.	Shakuni	rubbed	his	hands	in	glee.
The	sabha	was	as	silent	as	death.	Except	for	the	irritating	howling	of	a	street	dog
somewhere	outside	the	palace,	and	the	faint	singing	of	that	ugly	beggar	lamenting
the	fate	of	the	country,	there	was	no	other	sound.	Everything	looked	perfect	to	the
Gandhara	Prince.	This	land	was	finished.	Shakuni	could	almost	hear	the	voices	of
his	slain	people,	echoing	around	him.	He	wanted	to	cheer	with	them.	But	this	was
not	the	time	for	triumphant	displays.	There	was	still	work	to	be	done.	He	waited
for	the	inevitable.
The	dice	had	fallen.

***
To	be	continued	in
AJAYA,	Book	II,	Rise	of	Kali

SHORT	NOTES
POLYANDRY	IN	ANCIENT	INDIA

One	of	the	first	instances	of	polyandry	occurs	in	the	Rig	Veda.	Surya,	also	known
as	Ushas,	is	wooed	and	married	by	the	Aswini	brothers	–	the	Gods	of	Dawn	and
Dusk.	 The	 Vedic	 poet	 wonders	 about	 their	 journey	 through	 the	 sky	 in	 a	 threeseated	 chariot,	 with	 their	 bride	 Surya	 (not	 to	 be	 confused	 with	 Surya,	 the	 Sun
God).	Surya	has	another	husband	–	none	other	than	Soma,	the	Moon.	The	Rig	Veda
also	 mentions	 Rodasi	 (Lightning),	 common	 wife	 of	 the	 Maruts	 –	 the	 Gods	 of
Clouds	and	Storms.	Another	example	is	Sage	Vasista,	said	to	have	been	the	son	of
both	Mitra	and	Varuna,	from	Urvashi.	It	is	easy	to	dismiss	these	mentions	as	poetic
license;	 however,	 the	 truth	 remains	 that	 all	 writers	 use	 imagery	 that	 is	 accepted
and	 understood	 by	 contemporary	 society.	 These	 examples	 serve	 to	 tell	 us	 that
polyandry,	 though	 not	 a	 dominant	 practice,	 was	 never	 shunned	 in	 the	 pre-epic
period	–	an	age	which	appears,	even	to	our	modern	eyes,	to	have	been	both	liberal
and	inclusive.
In	 the	Mahabharata	 era,	 the	 practise	 of	 polyandry	 was	 more	 the	 exception	 than
the	rule.	The	explanations	and	justifications	given	for	Draupadi’s	marriage	to	the
five	 Pandava	 brothers	 show	 the	 changing	 social	 values	 of	 the	 period.	 The
arguments	 seem	 somewhat	 contrived	 and	 lack	 the	 confident	 assertions	 of	 most
Vedic	writing.	The	Mahabharata	says	that	all	five	Pandava	brothers	married	her,
according	to	Vedic	rituals	(Agnisakshi	and	Saptapada),	and	hence	it	was	not	just
a	case	of	cohabitation,	as	is	sometimes	opined	by	critics.	The	arguments	regarding
the	propriety	of	a	woman	marrying	five	men	go	back	and	forth	in	the	epic.	There	is
mention	 that	 according	 to	 tradition,	 a	 woman	 could	 marry	 only	 four	 men	 at	 the
same	time,	any	 more	 would	 make	 her	 a	 prostitute.	 This	statement	 is	 particularly
intriguing	in	the	case	of	Draupadi.
Kunti	 is	 also	 aware	 of	 this.	 But	 who	 is	 to	 be	 left	 out	 from	 the	 five	 Pandavas,	 if
such	a	rule	was	to	be	applied	in	case	of	Draupadi,	is	the	great	dilemma	she	faces.
Yudhishtra	 rescues	 everyone	 by	 justifying	 polyandry	 by	 citing	 the	 examples	 of
Marisa,	 the	 tree	 spirit’s	 marriage	 to	 ten	 sages;	 and	 that	 of	 Vrakasi	 to	 the	 ten
Practesa	brothers.	However,	later	in	the	Mahabharata,	Karna	uses	the	argument
that	any	woman	who	marries	more	than	four	men	is	considered	a	prostitute,	hence
stripping	Draupadi	in	public	takes	on	another	dimension.	Karna	refers	to	existing

norms	rather	than	those	of	the	Vedic	period.
Marriage	 was	 considered	 valid	 only	 after	 the	 performance	 of	 the	 Vedic	 rituals.
Though	Arjuna	wins	Draupadi	at	the	swayamvara,	in	order	to	obtain	the	sanction
of	 society,	 all	 five	 brothers	 are	 married	 to	 her	 as	 per	 Vedic	 rituals	 according	 to
their	seniority.	The	rules	of	sharing	are	also	laid	down	by	Kunti,	and	each	brother
has	Draupadi	for	one	year.	The	text	is	ambiguous	about	the	sharing	arrangements
during	pregnancy,	but	we	can	assume	that	Draupadi	remained	with	the	father	of	the
unborn	child	until	its	birth	and	the	stipulated	time	thereafter	for	maternal	rituals	to
be	completed,	before	the	rotation	began	again.	Also,	it	is	likely	that	one	menstrual
cycle	elapsed	between	the	end	of	one	husband’s	time	and	the	beginning	of	the	next.
These	rules	were	applied	to	prevent	confusion	regarding	who	was	the	father	of	the
child.
Kunti	 justifies	 the	 marriage	of	 her	 five	 sons	 to	 one	 woman	 using	 the	 concept	 of
niyoga.	This	is	explained	in	various	texts	in	different	ways.	It	was	a	very	flexible
idea.	In	an	era	prior	to	the	time	of	the	epic,	younger	brothers	had	rights	over	their
sister-in-law	(the	 firstborn's	 wife),	 though	 not	the	other	way	round.	 Later,	as	the
social	norms	changed	niyoga	was	permitted	only	in	exceptional	circumstances.	It
originally	 meant	 that	 a	 woman	 whose	 husband	 was	 either	 incapable	 of	 fathering
children	or	had	died	childless,	could	appoint	a	man	to	be	the	father	of	her	child	–
rather	similar	to	the	modern	concept	of	sperm	donation.	Niyoga	also	had	societal
sanction	if	a	younger	sister-in-law	became	a	widow	without	having	any	sons.	That
particular	rule	is	quoted	by	Bhishma	in	the	cases	of	Ambika	and	Ambalika;	hence,
Vedavyasa	 becomes	 the	 natural	 father	 of	 Dhritarashtra,	 Pandu	 and	 Vidhura.	 In	 a
sense,	 this	is	also	polyandry.	 Niyoga	also	 came	 to	 mean	 that	 with	 the	 husband’s
consent,	the	wife	could	bear	sons	from	men	of	any	of	the	three	castes;	or	according
to	some	schools	of	thought,	only	by	sapinda	(brothers/those	who	shared	the	same
pinda).	 Kunti	 and	 Madri’s	 polyandrous	 relationships	 with	 various	 gods	 had	 the
consent	of	their	husband,	Pandu.
But	 Kunti	 having	 children	 using	 niyoga,	may	 have	 had	 more	 to	 do	 with	 politics
than	 custom.	 She	 does	 not	 disclose	 the	 identity	 of	 her	 illegitimate	 son	 until	 the
very	 end;	 nor	 does	 she	 ask	 for	 her	 brother-in-law’s	 help	 in	 procreation,	 as	 per
custom.	According	to	the	Manusmriti,	niyoga	can	be	performed	only	if	there	are
no	male	heirs	and	hence	the	lineage	is	on	the	verge	of	extinction.	That	was	not	the
case	in	the	Kuru	ruling	house.	If	Pandu	was	impotent,	Dhritarashtra	was	still	able
to	father	children,	and	did.	But	Kunti	wished	her	own	son	to	succeed	to	the	throne

of	Hastinapura	and	not	Gandhari’s.	Hence,	in	Kunti’s	niyoga,	it	was	not	a	brotherin-law	or	even	a	mortal	who	takes	part,	but	the	Gods	themselves.	The	Pandavas
thus	 become	 known	 as	 divine	 progeny	 and	 the	 sons	 of	 Gods.	 From	 this	 seed
sprouts	 the	 conflict	 portrayed	 in	 the	 Mahabharata.	 Yudhishtra’s	 claim	 to	 the
throne	 is	 justified	 by	 the	 rule	 that	 sons	 born	 of	 a	 niyoga	 relationship	 are
considered	the	husband’s	sons.	The	logic	for	this	was	that	if	a	neighbour	planted
seeds	in	another’s	land,	when	they	sprouted	the	plants	became	the	property	of	the
owner	and	not	the	one	who	planted	them.	But	these	ideas	are	pushed	even	further
in	the	case	of	the	Pandavas.	One	may	wonder	what	could	be	a	modern	explanation
for	impregnation	by	various	Gods?
Pandu	 and	 his	 two	 wives	 chose	 to	 retire	 to	 the	 forest	 to	 undertake	 niyoga.	 The
clandestine	nature	of	this	act	stands	in	stark	contrast	to	a	similar	situation	in	the
previous	 generation,	 when	 Satyavathi	 called	 upon	 her	 ascetic	 son,	 Vyasa,	 born
before	her	marriage,	to	be	the	niyoga	partner	for	her	widowed	daughters-in-law.
Vyasa	 then	 lived	 in	 the	 palace	 and	 did	 as	 his	 mother	 asked,	 in	 an	 open	 manner.
Society	 accepted	 both	 the	 Dowager-	 Queen’s	 illegitimate	 son	 (Vyasa)	 and	 his
niyoga.	Pandu	 himself	was	 a	 product	 of	 this.	 Possibly,	 Kunti	 and	 Pandu	 thought
that	 children	 born	 in	 the	 usual	 niyoga	 norms	 would	 not	 gain	 the	 support	 of	 the
people;	hence,	 the	sons	of	Dhritarashtra	and	Gandhari	would	 then	 have	 the	 only
legitimate	claim	on	the	throne	of	Hastinapura.
Most	probably,	the	niyoga	of	both	Kunti	and	Madri	was	with	forest	dwellers	or
travelling	ascetics.	Yudhishtra	could	have	been	of	Brahmin	origin.	It	may	be	noted
that	there	were,	and	still	are,	Brahmins	who	aid	in	Hindu	funeral	rituals.	One	of
the	three	Brahmins,	who	partake	in	the	pinda,	is	designated	Yama,	or	the	God	of
Death,	for	the	duration	of	the	ritual.	As	per	custom,	the	three	Brahmins	need	to	be
men	 learned	 in	 the	 scriptures	 and	 respected	 for	 their	 knowledge.	 Yudhishtra’s
father	could	very	well	have	been	one	such	scholar.	Bhima’s	lineage	could	be	that
of	a	forest	dweller.	The	fact	that	Kunti	permits	only	Bhima	to	marry	a	rakshasi,
Hidumbi,	may	bear	on	this	possibility.	Bhima	has	a	violent	nature	and	there	are	a
few	occasions	when	he	drinks	the	blood	of	his	enemies.	Arjuna,	of	course,	is	the
son	 of	 the	 Deva	 King,	 Indra.	 The	 Mahabharata	 shows	 Indra	 dwelt	 in
Khandivaprastha,	and	was	a	friend	of	Takshaka.	Whatever	may	be	the	truth,	in	an
era	 when	 people	 believed	 in	 Gods	 coming	 down	 from	 heaven	 and	 bestowing
children	 upon	 mortals,	 the	 propaganda	 that	 the	 Pandavas	 were	 the	 sons	 of	 Gods
was	a	political	masterstroke	by	Kunti	and	her	strategists.

Another	 curious	 nugget	 in	 the	 Mahabharata	 is	 the	 fact	 that	 Vidhura’s	 two	 sons
shared	one	wife,	though	Vidhura	himself	advises	against	polyandry.	While	reading
the	Mahabharata,	one	cannot	but	wonder	at	the	openness	of	society	then,	and	how
effectively	 the	 great	 epic	 captured	 the	 changing	 social	 norms	 of	 what	 was
acceptable	and	what	was	taboo.
DHRITARASHTRA-GANDHARI’S	100	SONS	&	ONE	DAUGHTER

Pandu	retired	to	the	forest	with	Kunti	and	Madri.	The	news	that	Kunti	had	become
pregnant	with	a	divine	child,	made	Gandhari	impatient	and	insecure.	She	wanted
100	 sons.	 Vyasa	 had	 granted	 her	 a	 boon	 saying	 she	 would	 have	 them.	 However,
she	did	not	bear	a	son,	even	after	a	pregnancy	lasting	two	years.	When	she	heard
the	news	about	Kunti,	Gandhari	hit	her	own	stomach	in	frustration	and	delivered	a
lump	 of	 flesh.	 Vyasa	 divided	 this	 lump	 into	 101	 pieces	 and	 sealed	 them	 in	 mud
containers,	 where	 they	 developed	 to	 become	 100	 boys	 and	 one	 girl.	 Gandhari
delivered	the	lump	of	flesh	nine	months	before	Yudhishtra’s	birth;	but	the	100	boys
and	the	lone	girl,	were	born	a	day	after	Yudhishtra	was	born.	Hence,	Suyodhana
was	part	of	the	lump	Gandhari	delivered	long	before	Yudhishtra;	but	he	was	born
a	day	after	Yudhishtra.	Which	of	the	Princes	was	the	eldest	was	thus	a	perplexing
question	and	it	forms	the	root	cause	of	the	Mahabharata	war.
Being	the	rebel	I	am,	I	have	tried	to	find	a	logical	explanation	for	the	seemingly
absurd	 situation	 of	 a	 couple	 having	 101	 children.	 What	 does	 this	 mean	 to	 the
modern	mind?	A	human	pregnancy	cannot	last	two	years.	Just	as	Kunti	was	in	the
race	to	produce	the	firstborn	in	the	family,	Dhritarashtra	and	Gandhari	must	also
have	 been	 desperate	 to	 produce	 the	 firstborn	 son.	 It	 could	 be	 that	 Gandhari
miscarried	 and	 the	 story	 of	 her	 two-year	 pregnancy	 and	 the	 lump	 of	 flesh	 being
divided	was	an	excuse	to	hide	the	fact	that	her	son	was	younger	than	Yudhishtra.
Or	did	Gandhari	perhaps	miscarry	and	Vyasa	give	her	a	concoction,	leading	to	the
multiple	 births	 the	 following	 year?	 The	 remaining	 Kaurava	 siblings	 could	 have
been	 the	 children	 of	 concubines.	 This	 theory	 has	 the	 merit	 of	 plausibility.	 More
fantastic	 theories	 suggest	 the	 ancients	 knew	 about	 test	 tube	 babies	 and	 cloning;
however,	 a	 more	 rational	 explanation	 is	 that	 while	 all	 the	 Kauravas	 may	 have
been	 Dhritarashtra’s	 children,	 they	 were	 not	 essentially	 Gandhari’s,	 as	 they	 are
often	 referred	 to	 as	 ’Dhartarashtras’,	 in	 the	 epic.	 Suyodhana	 refuses	 to
acknowledge	the	 Pandavas	 lineage	 and	 claim	 on	 the	 throne	 by	 always	 referring
them	 as	 Kaunteyas,	 or	 the	 sons	 of	 Kunti,	 but	 not	 Pandu,	 whereas	 he	 is	 called
Dhartarashtra,	son	of	Dhritarashtra.	It	is	also	pertinent	that,	except	for	Suyodhana

and	Sushasana,	none	of	the	other	Kauravas	is	referred	to	as	sons	of	Gandhari,	but
only	as	Kauravas	or	Dhartarashtras.	While	the	other	Kauravas	could	have	been	the
sons	of	Dhritarashtra’s	concubines,	perhaps	the	role	of	Vyasa	was	to	legitimize	the
‘containers’	 or	 wombs	 of	 these	 other	 woman	 who	 carried	 Dhritarashtra’s	 seed.
Obviously,	 in	 the	 race	 to	 produce	 the	 firstborn,	 neither	 Pandu	 nor	 Dhritarashtra
were	taking	any	chances.
When	I	had	raised	the	question	with	my	late	father,	L.	Neelakantan,	he	proffered	a
simple	 but	 beautiful	 explanation.	 His	 advice	 was	 not	 to	 approach	 the
Mahabharata	just	as	a	story,	for	it	contains	hidden	symbolism:	the	100	Kauravas
represent	 the	 Desires	 and	 follies	 of	 the	 mind.	 Hundred	 is	 just	 a	 number	 used	 to
represent	 ‘numerous’,	 and	 should	 not	 be	 taken	 literally.	 Dhritarashtra	 represents
Ego,	which	is	blind	 and	 produces	 numerous	 Desires.	 Some	 are	 good	 and	 others
bad.	The	Kaurava	names	have	both	the	positive	suffix	Su	and	the	negative	prefix
Du.	 Gandhari	 represents	 the	 Mind	 and	 blind	 maternal	 Love.	 Hence,	 the	 Desires
are	sons	of	blind	parents	–	Mind	and	Ego.
On	another	plane,	the	Pandavas	represent	the	five	Senses.	They	are	all	married	to
Draupadi,	also	called	Krishna	(black).	Black	represents	Anger.	The	marriage	 of
the	five	Senses	to	Anger,	has	catastrophic	results	when	fighting	the	Desires	–	such
as	when	the	Pandavas	visit	the	Kaurava	sabha	for	the	game	of	dice.	Believing	in
Fate,	 not	 action,	 they	 gamble	 with	 the	 Desires,	 and	 lose	 everything.	 Anger	 is
shamed	 and	 disrobed	 by	 the	 Desires	 and	 Fate.	 The	 Pandavas	 also	 represent	 the
five	 Virtues:	 Yudhishtra	 represents	 Wisdom,	 as	 the	 son	 of	 Time	 (Kala).	 Bhima
portrays	Strength,	as	the	son	of	Vayu	(Prana).	Arjuna	represents	Willpower,	as	the
son	of	Indra.	Nakula	and	Sahadeva	 stand	for	Beauty	and	Knowledge,	 as	sons	 of
the	Aswinis,	the	Gods	of	Dawn/Beginnings.	It	is	Krishna	who	brings	the	Pandavas
and	the	Desires	together	at	Kurukshetra.	He	is	the	Universal	Soul	(Paramatma).
Black	 represents	 vastness/depth	 here.	 The	 Virtues	 are	 fated	 to	 lose	 without	 this
aid.	Kurukshetra	represents	the	Soul.	With	the	aid	of	Universal	Consciousness,	the
Virtues	triumph	over	desires.
This	 was	 my	 father’s	 explanation	 of	 the	 underlying	 significance	 of	 the
Mahabharata.	However,	his	rebel	son’s	take	on	the	great	epic	is	Ajaya.
SUGGESTED	READING

1.	 Sarva	Daman	Singh.	Polyandry	in	Ancient	India.	Motilal	Banarsidass	New

2.	
3.	
4.	
5.	

Delhi,	1988
John	Dowson.	Classical	 History	 of	 Hindu	 Myth	 and	 Religion.	 Munshiram
Manoharlal	Publishers,	New	Delhi,	2000
A.L.	Ahuja.	Women	in	Indian	Mythology.	Rupa	&	Co.	New	Delhi,	2011
Ram	Sharan	Sharma.	Aspects	of	Political	Ideas	and	Institutions	in	Ancient
India.	Motilal	Banarsidass,	New	Delhi,	2012
Vettam	Mani.	Puranic	Encyclopedia.	Motilal	Banarsidass,	New	Delhi	2010;
Malayalam	 ed:	 DC	 Books,	 Kottayam	 2013	 [Ed:	 Perhaps	 the	 most
comprehensive	 book	 on	 various	 Puranic	 characters;	 written	 as	 short	 notes,
alphabetically	 arranged.	 A	 good	 reference	 source	 for	 anyone	 interested	 in
Hindu	mythology.]

SELECT	GLOSSARY
Aarti	–	Worship	with	lamps
Acharya	–	Guru,	teacher
Achuyuta	–	Another	name	for	Krishna
Aghoris	–	Ascetic	worshippers	of	Shiva	who	do	not	believe	in	caste	or	the	taboos
of	Hinduism;	known	for	extreme	and	even	outlandish	penances
Ajaya	–	Unconquerable
Andha	–	Blind
Anga	–	Ancient	Indian	kingdom;	present-day	Eastern	Bihar	and	parts	of	Bengal
Angavasthra	–	Shawl	worn	by	nobles
Ashwini	Twins	–	Gods	of	sunrise	and	sunset
Astra	–	Arrow/shaft;	described	by	the	epics	as	having	divine	powers
Asura	–	Hindu	mythology	portrays	Asuras	as	demons	of	darkness	–	the	antithesis
to	Devas,	the	Gods;	here,	they	are	one	among	many	tribes
Atharva	–	The	fourth	Veda,	which	speaks	of	magic,	spells,	etc.
Atma	–	Soul
Avarna	 –	 A	 person	 who	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the	 first	 three	 castes;	 literally	 one
without	colour	(varna);	opposite	of	savarna	(person	with	a	good	colour)
Ayurveda	–	Ancient	Indian	system	of	medicine
Bindi	–	Red	dot	worn	on	the	forehead	by	Hindu	women
Brahmacharya	 –	 Self-imposed	 vow	 of	 celibacy;	 a	 period	 of	 life	 as	 a	 student
when	a	man	observes	brahmacharya;	to	seek	or	follow	God

Brahman	–	The	Supreme	Power	responsible	for	Creation	and	the	Universe
Brahmin	 –	 The	 highest	 Hindu	 caste	 and	 varna	 –	 Priests	 and	 scholars;	 Hindu
society	 was	 divided	 into	 four	 varnas	(refer	 Varna	 for	 details),	 and	 further	 subdivided	into	jatis	(castes);	these	varied	from	region	to	region	(eg.	a	Brahmin	from
Kashmir	 in	 the	 north	 and	 one	 from	 Andhra	 in	 the	 south,	 belonged	 to	 the	 same
varna	but	did	not	intermarry	as	they	belonged	to	different	castes)
Chaitra	–	Indian	calendar	month	when	spring	begins
Chandagyo	–	One	of	the	most	important	of	the	Upanishads
Chandalas	–	One	of	the	lowest	of	the	Untouchable	castes;	keepers	of	graveyards;
those	who	carried	the	dead
Chaturvarnas	–	The	four	varnas	(refer	Varna	for	details)
Chenda	–	A	south	Indian	drum	beaten	with	a	curved	stick;	known	even	today	as
the	Asura	Vadhya	or	‘musical	instrument	of	the	Asuras’	and	used	during	festivals
in	Kerala	and	parts	of	south	Karnataka	and	Tamil	Nadu
Chera	–	Ancient	kingdom	in	south	India,	with	Muzaris	as	its	capital
Chettis	–	Merchant	caste	of	south	India	(corruption	of	the	term	shresti)
Crore	–	One	hundred	lakhs;	ten	million
Dakshinajanapada	–	Land	south	of	the	Vindhyas;	south	India
Darshan	–	Literally	‘view’;	it	was	customary	for	Indian	monarchs	to	appear	at	a
balcony	and	hear	petitions	from	their	subjects
Dasa	–	Servant	or	slave
Dasi	–	Female	servant/slave
Dhanurveda	–	Science	of	arms	and	weapon-making
Dharma	 –	 Rough	 translation:	 duty,	 righteousness	 etc;	 but	 dharma	 encompasses
more	–	it	is	the	code	of	life;	antonym:	adharma

Dharmaveera	–	Warrior	or	hero	of	dharma
Dharmayudha	–	Ancient	code	of	battle
Dhoti	 –	 Traditional	 lower	 garment	 for	 men,	 made	 from	 an	 unstitched	 length	 of
cloth;	also	worn	in	different	styles	by	lower-class	women	in	ancient	India
Gandhara	–	Present-day	Kandahar	in	Afghanistan
Gandharvas	–	 Singers	 in	 the	 courts	 of	 the	 Gods;	 considered	 to	 be	 supernatural
beings	 pining	 for	 love;	 messengers	 between	 the	 Gods	 and	 men;	 here,	 they	 are
simply	another	aboriginal	tribe
Ganga	–	Ganges
Gangotri	–	Glacier	from	where	the	Ganga	originates
Gayatri	–	Sacred	Hindu	mantra	from	the	Rig	Veda;	when	the	caste	system	was	at
its	 zenith,	 many	 texts	 forbade	 Shudras	 from	 even	 listening	 to	 it;	 some	 texts
advocated	 pouring	 molten	 lead	 into	 the	 ears	 of	 Shudras	 who	 heard	 the	 Gayatri
even	accidently	–	though	it	is	doubtful	if	it	was	really	practised
Ghat	–	A	broad	flight	of	steps	leading	down	to	a	river
Gobar	–	Cow	dung
Har	Har	Mahadev	–	Hail	Shiva,	the	Greatest	God
Hari	–	Another	name	for	Lord	Vishnu
Hastinapura	–	City	of	Elephants,	capital	of	the	Kuru	kingdom
Indra	–	 King	of	the	 Gods;	used	here	as	a	generic	 name	of	the	tribe	who	are	the
nominal	rulers	of	the	Devas;	Indra,	their	last	King,	lives	in	penury;	he	is	also	the
biological	father	of	Arjuna
Indraprastha	–	Ancient	capital	of	the	Pandavas;	present-day	Delhi
Jambu	Dweepa	–	Ancient	Indian	name	for	Asia

Jaya	–	Victory
Kala	–	 Time;	 also	 God	 of	 Time	 and	 Death,	 commonly	 known	 as	 Yama	 (derived
from	the	unit	for	measuring	time	–	yamam)
Kalaripayattu	–	Traditional	martial	art	form	of	Kerala
Kalinga	–	Present-day	Odisha	(roughly)
Kaliya	 Mardana	 –	 Kaliya:	 a	 poisonous	 snake	 (naga),	 in	 the	 original
Mahabharata;	 Mardana:	 punishment,	 suppression,	 etc.	 Kaliya	 Mardana	 is	 one
telling	of	the	legend	of	Lord	Krishna	punishing	the	naga	for	his	evil	deeds
Kamarupa	–	Ancient	name	for	present-day	Assam
Karma	–	Action	or	deed
Kashi	–	Another	name	for	the	holy	city	of	Varanasi	or	Benaras
Kauravas	–	Scions	of	the	Kuru	dynasty
Khandiva	–	Present-day	Delhi
Kingara	–	Servants;	soldier-slaves
Kinnaras	–	In	Hindu	mythology,	these	are	celestial	musicians,	half-horse	and	halfhuman;	here,	they	are	treated	as	just	another	tribe
Kirata	–	A	wild	tribe
Kshatriyas	–	The	warrior	caste;	often	kings	and	rulers
Kuravan,	Malayans,	Vannans,	Velans	–	Tribes	from	the	Western	Ghats	(Sahyas)
of	 India.	 They	 were	 Priests	 before	 the	 Brahmins	 became	 prominent;	 even	 today,
many	rituals	in	the	Malabar	region	are	conducted	by	these	people
Kurta	–	Indian	shirt
Lakh	–	One	hundred	thousand

Lathi	–	Staff,	usually	used	by	police	to	control	crowds
Leela	–	Divine	play	or	drama
Lord	Vishwanatha	–	Lord	of	the	Universe;	another	name	for	Shiva
Ma	–	Mother
Madhava	–	Another	name	for	Krishna
Mahadeva	–	Great	God;	another	name	for	Shiva
Maheswara	–	Great	God;	another	name	for	Shiva
Mahout	–	Elephant	handler
Mata	–	Mother
Maya	–	Illusion
Mela	–	Gathering
Milavu,	Timila,	Maddallam	&	Mrudangam	–	Percussion	instruments
Mlecha	–	 Barbaric/uncivilized	 people;	 term	 usually	 used	 for	 foreigners	 like	 the
Greeks	or	Chinese,	in	ancient	India
Moksha	–	Salvation;	nirvana	in	Buddhism
Muzaris	–	Ancient	port	city	on	the	South-Western	coast	of	India,	50	kms	north	of
modern-day	Cochin,	in	Kerala
Nagas	–	An	ancient	tribe;	literally	‘serpents’;	here	they	represent	a	warring	tribe
who	rises	against	caste	oppression
Namaskara	–	‘I	bow	to	the	goodness	in	thee’	–	a	form	of	greeting;	also	Namaste
Nishada	–	A	hunter	tribe
Onam	 –	 The	 only	 Indian	 festival	 celebrated	 in	 honour	 of	 an	 Asura	 King	 –

Mahabali;	 State	 festival	 of	 Kerala;	 people	 still	 believe	 the	 reign	 of	 this	 Asura
King	(cheated	of	his	kingdom	by	Lord	Vishnu	in	his	Vamana	avatar),	is	the	ideal;
and	every	human	being	was	considered	equal	under	his	rule.
Pallavas	–	Ancient	south-Indian	kingdom;	its	capital	was	Kanchipuram/Kanchi
Pallu	–	The	loose	end	of	a	sari	worn
Panchayat	–	Indian	village	Council,	usually	with	5	members
Pandavas	–	Sons	of	Pandu
Pandya	–	Ancient	kingdom	in	south	India	with	Madurai	as	its	capital
Parameswara	 –	 Literally	 ‘Supreme	 God’;	 another	 name	 for	 Shiva,	 one	 of	 the
Trinity	of	Hindu	Gods	(the	other	two	being	Brahma	and	Vishnu)
Parashuramakshetra	–	 Place	 of	 Parashurama	 –	 the	 ancient	 kingdom	 of	 Cheras
(Gokurna	 to	 Kanyakumari,	 between	 the	 Sahyas	 and	 the	 sea).	 It	 is	 believed
Parashurama	reclaimed	this	land	from	the	sea	and	gifted	it	to	the	Brahmins
Pariah	–	Lowest	caste,	and	the	most	discriminated	against
Parvati	–	Lord	Shiva’s	consort
Pasupathi	–	Literally	‘Lord	of	the	Beasts’;	usually	applied	to	Shiva
Patala	–	Netherworld;	here,	capital	of	the	Asuras	in	exile
Poorna	–	River	in	Kerala;	also	known	as	Periyar
Prabhasa	–	A	city	in	present-day	Gujarat
Prabhu	–	Sir,	an	honorific;	also	used	to	mean	a	rich	man
Puja	–	Religious	ritual
Purendra	–	Indra,	King	of	the	Gods;	also	known	as	‘destroyer	of	cities’
Ragas	–	Scales	in	Indian	classical	music

Raja	Dharma	–	Code	of	ethics	for	rulers
Rajasuya	 –	 Sacrifice	 performed	 by	 Indian	 Kings	 in	 ancient	 times,	 who
considered	themselves	powerful	enough	to	be	Emperors
Rakshasa	–	Mythological	evil	being
Sabha	–	Court	or	assembly
Sahya	–	Mountains	running	parallel	to	the	Western	seaboard	of	India
Samhita	–	A	collection	of	holy	hymns/science/knowledge
Sanathana	 –	 Eternal;	 Hinduism	 is	 often	 considered	 an	 eternal	 religion	 without
beginning	or	end
Sari	–	Traditional	attire	of	Indian	women,	made	from	6	yards	of	unstitched	cloth
Sarpanch	–	Village	Chief/Head	of	the	Panchayat
Sarswati	 –	 A	 mighty	 river	 which	 once	 flowed	 between	 the	 Indus	 and	 Ganges,
which	has	now	vanished
Shastras	–	Rules,	codes,	tradition,	science,	specialized	knowledge
Shiva	–	The	Destroyer,	one	of	the	Hindu	Trinity	of	Gods	who	at	the	end	of	each
eon,	destroys	the	Universe,	after	which	Brahma	the	Creator,	recreates	it
Shivalinga	–	Phallic	symbol	of	Lord	Shiva
Shravan	–	Fifth	month	of	the	Hindu	calendar;	considered	a	holy	month
Shri	–	Honorific	for	gentlemen;	equivalent	to	Mister;	also	spelt	Sri,	Shree,	etc.
Shudra	 –	 Lowest	 of	 the	 four	 Varnas,	 the	 other	 three	 being	 (in	 order	 of
precedence):	Brahmana,	Khshatriya,	and	Vaishya
Sindhu	–	River	Indus;	also	the	land	around	it;	here,	Indus	is	ruled	by	Jayadratha,
Duryodhana’s	brother-in-law

Smritis	 –	 ‘That	 which	 is	 remembered’;	 Hindu	 laws	 written	 by	 different	 sages;
including	Manu	Smriti,	the	code	for	society	in	ancient	India
Soma	–	Important	ritual	drink	during	Vedic	times;	also	the	moon
Somanatha	–	Celebrated	temple	of	Lord	Shiva	–	Lord	of	Somas	(life	energy)
Suta	 –	 Charioteer	 caste;	 also	 famous	 as	 storytellers.	 Kings	 often	 used	 them	 to
propagate	tales	of	their	valour	in	battle
Swami	–	Sir,	an	honorific	used	to	address	a	social	superior
Swayamvara	 –	 Ancient	 Indian	 custom	 wherein	 a	 girl	 chose	 her	 groom	 from	 a
gathering	of	suitors,	sometimes	through	a	competition
Tapsya	–	Penance
Timila	–	Percussion	instrument	of	Asura	origin
Trimurti	–	Trinity	of	Gods:	Brahma	the	Creator,	Vishnu	the	Preserver;	and	Shiva
the	Destroyer
Tulsi	 –	 Holy	 Basil;	 a	 plant	 revered	 in	 Hinduism,	 especially	 in	 the	 worship	 of
Krishna	or	Vishnu
Upanishads	 –	 Collection	 of	 holy	 books;	 along	 with	 the	 commentaries	 (called
Brahmanas),	which	form	the	basis	of	Indian	philosophical	thought
Urumi	 –	 Sinuous,	 belt-like	 sword	 used	 in	 Kalaripayattu,	 an	 ancient	 marital	 art
form	of	south	India
Uttariya	–	Shawl,	worn	as	a	shoulder	cloth
Vaikunta	–	Abode	of	Lord	Vishnu	and	the	heaven	reserved	for	his	devotees
Vaishya	–	Merchant	caste
Vana	–	Grove	or	forest
Vanara	–	Monkey;	here	they	are	a	tribe	of	mixed	descent,	living	in	southern	India

Vanga	–	Present-day	Bengal,	including	Bangladesh
Varna	 –	 Literally	 ‘colour’;	 also	 meaning	 ‘social	 groups’;	 Hindu	 society	 was
divided	into	4	basic	varnas:	Brahmana	or	Brahmins	(Priests	and	teachers),	at	the
top;	 Kshatriyas	 or	 warriors	 second;	 Vaishya	 or	 merchants	 third;	 and	 Shudras
(farmers,	 craftsmen,	 foot	 soldiers,	 petty	 traders,	 dancers,	 musicians,	 etc.)	 at	 the
bottom	 of	 the	 caste	 hierarchy;	 below	 these	 were	 the	 poorest	 of	 the	 poor,	 the
Untouchables
Varnashrama	 –	 In	 the	 ancient	 Hindu	 way	 of	 life,	 the	 ideal	 lifespan	 of	 an
individual	maintaining	dharma,	 was	 divided	 into	 4	 stages:	 student,	 householder,
retiree;	and	renunciation
Vatapi	–	Present-day	Badami,	a	city	in	north-central	Karnataka
Vayu	–	God	of	Winds
Vedas	 –	 The	 four	 holy	 books	 (Rig,	 Yajur,	 Sama	 and	 Atharva),	 of	 the	 Hindus;
considered	to	possess	all	the	wisdom	of	the	world
Vijaya	–	Victory
Vindhyas	–	Mountain	ranges	which	separate	northern	and	southern	India
Vishnu	 –	 The	 Preserver,	 second	 of	 the	 Hindu	 Trinity	 of	 Gods,	 who	 protects	 the
rhythm	of	the	Universe
Yadava	–	Tribe	of	cowherds
Yajna	–	Ritual	sacrifice	of	herbal	preparations	into	the	fire	with	Vedic	mantras
Yaksha	–	Supernatural	beings;	sometimes	the	patron	gods	of	trees	and	forests	in
Hindu	 mythology;	 believed	 to	 guard	 hidden	 treasures;	 the	 female	 of	 the	 species
(Yakshi),	 are	 notorious	 for	 charming	 unsuspecting	 travellers	 into	 the	 forest	 and
drinking	their	blood	or	eating	them;	here,	they	are	simply	a	tribe
Yavana	Desa	–	Greece
Yavana	–	Greek

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
My	thanks	go	to	my	readers,	without	whose	support,	encouragement	and	criticism
of	 my	 debut	 novel,	 Asura,	 Tale	 of	 the	 Vanquished,	 I	 would	 not	 have	 toiled	 to
write	about	the	other	great	‘villain’	of	our	epics,	within	the	span	of	a	year.	I	thank
each	of	my	readers	who	was	kind	enough	to	write	to	me	with	his/her	feedback.
To	Swarup	Nanda,	for	being	my	friend	and	guide,	both	for	Asura	and	Ajaya.
To	 my	 Editor,	 Chandralekha	 Maitra,	 for	 guiding	 me	 in	 making	 my	 writing	 better
while	giving	me	enough	creative	freedom,	and	then	suffering	my	draft	manuscripts
with	patience.
To	 my	 Publisher,	 Leadstart	 Publishing,	 for	 showing	 confidence	 in	 me	 by
publishing	 my	 second	 book,	 Ajaya.	 As	 also	 to	 the	 other	 team	 members:	 Pretti,
Iftikar,	Rajesh,	Ramu,	Salim	and	many	others,	who	have	worked	with	dedication
to	make	the	first	book	a	success	and	showing	the	same	enthusiasm	for	my	second.
To	my	father,	the	Late	L.	Neelakantan,	and	mother,	Chellamal,	for	introducing	me
to	the	world	of	mythology.
To	 my	 Aparna,	 for	 your	 unstinting	 support	 in	 my	 endeavours	 and	 for	 the	 love	 I
often	wonder	whether	I	deserve.
To	my	daughter	Ananya	and	son	Abhinav,	for	keeping	the	storyteller	in	me	alive
by	demanding	more	and	more	stories	every	night	and	being	the	critics	any	author
dreads.
To	 my	 sister	 Chandrika	 and	 brother-in-law	 Parameswaran,	 my	 brother
Lokanathan,	 Rajendran	 and	 my	 sisters-in-law,	 Meena	 and	 Radhika.	 Also	 my
nephew	 Dileep,	 and	 nieces	 Rakhi	 and	 Deepa,	 as	 well	 as	 my	 extended	 family
members,	for	all	those	wonderful	days.
To	my	pet	Jacky,	the	blackie,	who	keeps	me	glued	to	my	laptop	by	barking	at	the
slightest	show	of	laziness	and	demanding	I	take	him	for	a	walk	as	punishment	the
moment	I	lift	my	fingers	from	the	keyboard.
To	 Santosh	 Prabhu,	 Sujith	 Krishnan,	 and	 Rajesh	 Rajan,	 for	 the	 evenings	 spent

together	 discussing	 Indian	 philosophy	 and	 the	 Mahabharata,	 years	 ago,	 which
sowed	 the	seed	of	this	novel	 in	 me.	To	Rajiv	Prakash	 and	Shevlin	Sebastin,	for
their	frequent	mails	that	have	sparked	my	creativity.	To	Premjeet,	for	his	maverick
ideas.	To	GMP	Nayak	for	his	insights.	To	(Essarpee)	S.R.	Prasanth	Kumar,	for	his
great	support.
To	my	country	and	my	people,	for	tolerating	different	points	of	view	and	for	the
richness	of	our	history	and	mythology.
To	the	rich	traditions	of	my	hometown,	Thripoonithura,	and	the	history	of	Cochin.
To	Vedavyasa,	the	patron	of	all	Indian	writers;	the	greatest	writer	to	have	walked
this	earth.
To	the	masters	of	writing	in	all	our	Indian	languages,	with	sincere	 apologies	for
daring	to	attempt	something	that	has	already	been	so	skilfully	essayed	by	you	over
the	centuries.
I	owe	much	to	all	of	you,	as	well	as	to	many	others	who	I	may	have	forgotten	to
name	here.

AJAYA
Epic	of	the	Kaurava	Clan
BOOK	II

RISE	OF	KALI
“Beware!”	 the	 young	 captain	 shouted	 and	 Aswathama	 pulled	 on	 the	 reins	 of	 his
horse	 in	 the	 nick	 of	 time.	 A	 massive	 boulder	 missed	 him	 by	 inches	 and	 crashed
onto	the	narrow	path	with	a	thud.	It	bounced	down	the	cliff	face	and	disappeared
into	the	river	deep	below,	felling	a	few	trees	on	its	way.	When	the	dust	cleared,
Aswathama	 was	 still	 trying	 to	 steady	 his	 panicked	 horse.	 One	 misstep	 and	 he
knew	he	would	follow	the	path	made	by	the	boulder	and	splatter	like	an	eggshell,
a	 thousand	 feet	 below.	 The	 splash	 of	 the	 boulder	 hitting	 the	 water	 sounded
unusually	loud.
Aswathama’s	 heart	 pounded	 in	 his	 chest.	 Had	 the	 boulder	 been	 an	 accident	 or
was	someone	following	them?	He	looked	around;	the	place	looked	desolate	and
forlorn.	 Nothing	 stirred.	 Far	 below,	 the	 Deodar	 trees	 in	 the	 valley	 had	 turned
white	 with	 snow.	 The	 eerie	 silence	 when	 the	 wind	 stopped	 howling,	 was
frightening.	 The	 mountain	 crouched	 painfully,	 like	 a	 wounded	 beast.	 He	 had
undertaken	this	mission	thinking	it	would	be	an	adventure.	He	had	always	longed
to	see	the	ivory-tipped	peaks	of	the	Himalayas.	It	had	been	so	inviting	and	he	had
jumped	at	the	opportunity.
Far	away,	he	could	see	the	mountain	ranges	dissolving	into	the	sky.	He	wanted
to	rub	his	hands	to	get	the	circulation	back,	but	was	afraid	to	let	go	of	the	reins.	It
was	freezing	cold.	The	chill	pierced	his	skin	and	gnawed	at	his	bones.	But	more
than	the	elements,	it	was	the	inaction	and	boredom	that	was	killing	him.	“Where
are	the	bastards	hiding?”	Aswathama	asked,	more	of	himself	than	the	captain.

“Sir,	I	think	we	have	lost	our	way	again.”	He	heard	the	 pain	and	 frustration	in
the	captain’s	voice	and	his	anger	returned	in	a	flood.
“No,	we	have	not!”	He	watched	the	words	escaping	his	mouth	in	white	puffs.	An
argument	would	have	been	welcome,	but	his	captain	refused	to	oblige.
When	silence	crawled	back,	Aswathama	loosened	the	reins	and	the	horse	started
walking	forward.	His	army	of	twenty	men	dragged	themselves	behind	him,	through
the	treacherous	mountain	path.	It	had	started	snowing	again.
Boom!	A	scream	followed	the	crash	and	Aswathama	almost	fell	from	his	saddle.
They	had	been	hit.	In	that	instant	he	knew,	the	first	boulder	had	been	no	accident
and	 that	 more	 were	 on	 the	 way.	 The	 second	 one	 hit	 the	 rear	 of	 the	 column	 and
carried	 away	 two	 men,	 along	 with	 their	 horses.	 Aswathama	 knew	 that	 all	 his
arrogance	about	being	a	great	archer	was	futile	in	this	battle.	He	was	not	fighting
on	the	vast	and	dusty	plains	of	India.	This	was	Gandhara	and	the	country	had	the
reputation	 of	 teaching	 reigning	 superpowers	 and	 empires	 hard	 and	 unforgettable
lessons.	 The	 next	 boulder	 crashed	 down	 just	 behind	 him,	 hitting	 the	 captain	 and
his	horse.	He	saw	them	topple	over	the	cliff	and	vanish	into	the	depths	below.	The
agonized	 screams	 of	 the	 man	 and	 his	 beast	 echoed	 around	 them,	 making	 the
survivors	 edgy.	 He	 could	 sense	 the	 fear	 of	 his	 companions.	 He	 had	 to	 do
something.
What	was	that	moving	there?	Rather,	who	was	it?	Aswathama	peered	painfully
towards	the	top	of	the	mountain,	shading	his	red-rimmed	eyes	with	his	right	hand
while	 the	 left	 gripped	 the	 reins	 convulsively.	 He	 had	 seen	 someone	 moving.	 Or
was	the	snow	playing	its	usual	games	of	illusion?	As	he	kept	staring	at	the	point
high	above,	a	silent	scream	began	rising	from	his	belly.	The	warrior	in	him	sensed
it	 long	 before	 his	 eyes	 could	 see.	 The	 enemy	 had	 waited	 until	 they	 reached	 this
narrow	 path,	 with	 the	 towering	 mountain	 on	 one	 side	 and	 the	 deep	 abyss	 on	 the
other	–	the	perfect	ambush	spot	for	the	Gandharans.
Carefully,	Aswathama’s	right	hand	went	to	his	sword.	At	that	moment,	the	entire
mountain	began	to	reverberate	as	mounted	warriors	began	descending	on	them	at
great	 speed.	 “Forward!”	 he	 shouted,	 galloping	 like	 a	 mad	 possessed.	 He	 had	 to
get	off	the	narrow	path.	It	was	now	or	never.	The	mountainside	began	exploding
behind	them	as	the	Brahmin	warrior	and	his	daredevil	companions	rushed	across
the	perilously	narrow	mountain	path.	Boulders	rolled	down,	frightening	the	horses

and	threatening	to	dash	them	all	into	the	waters	far	below.	Behind,	men,	their	faces
masked	with	their	turbans,	were	chasing	them	towards	their	deaths.
“Either	we	get	that	bastard	Durjaya	today	or	we	all	perish.	We	owe	ourselves	at
least	 a	 warrior’s	 death	 in	 service	 of	 Suyodhana	 and	 our	 country.”	 Aswathama
shouted	over	the	din,	trying	to	motivate	his	companions.	He	could	not	be	sure	they
heard.	 But	 his	 next	 action	 inspired	 them	 to	 follow	 suit.	 It	 was	 one	 of	 reckless
courage,	 yet	 the	 very	 insanity	 of	 it	 made	 them	 delirious.	 Aswathama	 let	 go	 the
reins	and	stood	up	in	his	saddle,	facing	the	Gandharans,	his	back	to	his	galloping
horse.	 Balancing	 perilously,	 he	 drew	 his	 bowstring.	 His	 men	 did	 the	 same.	 His
first	 arrow	 pierced	 the	 throat	 of	 the	 man	 leading	 the	 attack,	 while	 those	 of	 his
companions	took	out	others.
“Shoot	 to	 kill…	 shoot…	 shoot!”	 Aswathama	 yelled	 as	 he	 showered	 lethal
arrows	on	 his	foes.	They	had	slowed	down	their	pursuers	but	 Aswathama	knew
they	could	not	continue	holding	them	off.	A	mis-step	by	one	of	the	horses	or	a	hit
by	any	of	the	boulders	falling	around	them	would	finish	everything.
And	 then	 he	 saw	 him	 and	 he	 almost	 slipped	 from	 his	 saddle.	 It	 was	 just	 for	 a
moment,	 as	 the	 cloth	 covering	 the	 face	 of	 one	 of	 the	 pursuers	 slipped.	 Yet	 there
was	no	mistaking	that	face…

70	WEEKS	ON	THE	BESTSELLER	LIST	&	COUNTING…

omorrow	is	my	funeral.	I	do	not	know	if	they	will	bury	me	like	a	mangy	dog	or
whether	I	will	get	a	funeral	fit	for	an	Emperor	–	an	erstwhile	Emperor.	But	it
does	 not	 really	 matter.	 I	 can	 hear	 the	 scuffing	 sounds	 made	 by	 the	 jackals.
They	 are	 busy	 eating	 my	 friends	 and	 family.	 Something	 scurried	 over	 my	 feet.
What	was	it?	I	haven’t	the	strength	to	raise	my	head.	Bandicoots.	Big,	dark,	hairy
rats.	They	conquer	the	battlefields	after	foolish	men	have	finished	their	business	of
killing	each	other.	It	is	a	feast	day	for	them	today,	just	as	it	has	been	for	the	past
eleven	 days.	 The	 stench	 is	 overpowering	 with	 the	 stink	 of	 putrefying	 flesh,	 pus,
blood,	urine	and	death.	The	enemy’s	and	our’s.	It	does	not	matter.	Nothing	matters
now.	 I	 will	 pass	 out	 soon.	 The	 pain	 is	 excruciating.	 His	 fatal	 arrow	 struck	 my
lower	abdomen.	But	I	am	not	afraid	of	death.	I	have	been	thinking	of	it	for	some
time	now.	Thousands	have	been	slain	over	the	last	few	days.

T

Somewhere	in	the	depths	of	the	sea,	my	brother	Kumbha	lies	dead,	half-eaten	by
sharks.	I	lit	my	son	Meghanada’s	funeral	pyre	yesterday.	Or	was	it	the	day	before?
I’ve	lost	all	 sense	 of	 time.	 I	have	lost	 the	sense	of	many	things.	A	lonely	star	is
shimmering	in	the	depths	of	the	universe.	Like	the	eye	of	God.	Very	much	like	the
third	eye	of	Shiva,	an	all-consuming,	all-destroying	third	eye.	My	beloved	Lanka
is	being	destroyed.	I	can	still	see	the	dying	embers	in	what	was	once	a	fine	city.
My	 capital	 Trikota	 was	 the	 greatest	 city	 in	 the	 world.	 That	 was	 before	 the
monkey-man	 came	 and	 set	 it	 on	 fire.	 Trikota	 burned	 for	 days.	 Shops,	 homes,
palaces,	men,	women,	and	babies,	everything	burned.	But	we	restored	it.	Almost

every	 able	 man	 joined	 in	 rebuilding	 Trikota.	 Then	 the	 monkey-men	 came	 with
their	 masters	 and	 destroyed	 everything	 again.	 Hanuman	 did	 that	 to	 us.	 The
monkey-man	brought	us	death,	destruction	and	defeat.
I	do	not	want	to	dwell	on	that.	I	should	have	killed	him	when	my	son	captured
him.	 Instead,	 I	 listened	 to	 my	 younger	 brother,	 who	 then	 plotted	 against	me.	 But
treason	 and	 betrayal	 is	 nothing	 new	 to	 the	 Asuras.	 I	 was	 naïve.	 I	 foolishly
believed	 I	 would	 always	 be	 loved	 by	 my	 brothers	 and	 my	 people.	 I	 never
imagined	I	would	be	betrayed.	I	feel	like	laughing	now.	But	it	is	not	easy	to	laugh
when	one’s	guts	lie	spread	around	like	a	wreath.	Sounds	of	joy	float	down	to	me
from	 my	 city.	 The	 enemy	 is	 celebrating	 their	 victory.	 The	 monkey-men	 will	 be
busy	 plundering	 Trikota.	 My	 temples	 will	 be	 looted;	 the	 granaries	 torched,	 and
schools	 and	 hospitals	 burnt.	 That	 is	 how	 victory	 parties	 are.	 We	 have	 done	 the
same	 and	 worse	 to	 many	 Deva	 villages,	 when	 the	 Goddess	 of	 victory	 was	 my
consort.	 Some	 ugly	 monkeys	 must	 have	 entered	 my	 harem.	 I	 hope	 my	 Queen	 has
the	sense	to	jump	from	a	cliff	before	anything	 happens.	 I	cannot	 control	 anything
now.	I	can	feel	the	hot	breath	of	death	on	my	face.
The	jackals	have	come.	Which	part	of	my	body	will	they	eat	first?	Perhaps	my
guts,	as	they	are	still	bleeding.	What	if	a	part	of	my	breastplate	chokes	a	jackal?	I
chuckle	at	the	thought.	A	jackal	sinks	his	teeth	into	my	cheek	and	rips	off	a	chunk
of	flesh.	That	is	it.	I’ve	lost	that	bet	too.	They	have	started	on	my	face.	Rats	are
nibbling	my	toes.	I,	Ravana,	have	come	a	long	way.	Now	I	do	not	have	anything
left	 to	 fight	 for,	 except	 this	 battle	 with	 the	 jackals.	 Tomorrow,	 there	 will	 be	 a
procession	 through	 the	 streets.	 They	 will	 raise	 my	 head	 on	 a	 pole	 and	 parade	 it
through	the	same	roads	that	saw	me	racing	by	in	my	royal	chariot.	My	people	will
throng	 to	 watch	 the	 spectacle	 with	 horror	 and	 perverse	 pleasure.	 I	 know	 my
people	well.	It	will	be	a	big	show.
I	 do	 not	understand	why	Rama	came	and	stood	over	 me	 when	I	 fell.	He	stood
there	 as	 if	 bestowing	 his	 blessings	 on	 me.	 He	 said	 to	 his	 brother	 that	 I	 was	 the
most	 learned	 man	 in	 the	 world	 and	 a	 great	 King,	 and	 one	 could	 learn	 the	 art	 of
governance	 from	 me.	 I	 almost	 laughed	 out	 loud.	 I	 had	 governed	 so	 well	 that	 my
empire	 lay	 shattered	 all	 around	 me.	 I	 could	 smell	 the	 burning	 corpses	 of	 my
soldiers.	 I	 could	 feel	 my	 Meghanada's	 cold	 and	 lifeless	 body	 in	 my	 arms	 even
now.	The	acrid	air	of	a	smouldering	Trikota	smothered	my	senses.	I	could	not	save
my	people	from	these	two	warriors	and	their	monkey-men.	And	he	was	saying	I
was	 a	 great	 ruler?	 I	 could	 appreciate	 the	 irony	 of	 it.	 I	 wanted	 to	 laugh	 at	 my

enemy;	laugh	at	the	foolish	men	who	trusted	me,	who	were	now	lying	all	around,
headless,	limbless	and	lifeless.	I	wanted	to	laugh	at	the	utopian	dreams	of	equality
for	all	men	on	which	I	had	built	an	empire.	It	was	laughable	indeed.	But	laughing
was	no	way	for	an	Emperor	to	die.	I	have	worked	hard	and	fought	with	the	gods
and	their	chosen	men.	I	doubt	if	heaven	has	a	place	for	people	who	die	of	laughter.
Then	 just	 as	 suddenly	 as	 it	 had	 started,	 the	 rats	 and	 jackals	 scurried	 away.	 A
shadow,	 darker	 than	 the	 dark	 night,	 fell	 upon	 me.	 A	 dark	 head	 with	 curly	 hair
blocked	 the	 lonely	 star	 from	 my	 view.	 Is	 it	 Kala,	 the	 God	 of	 Death,	 who	 has
come	to	take	me	away?	I	struggled	to	open	my	eyes	wider.	But	dried	blood	held
my	eyelids	together.	Is	it	one	of	Rama’s	lowly	servants	come	to	severe	my	head
and	take	it	back	as	a	trophy?	I	want	to	look	him	in	the	face.	I	want	to	look	into	his
eyes,	unwavering	and	unflinching	in	my	last	moments.	Something	about	that	head
and	curly	hair	reminded	me	of	my	past.	Do	I	know	him?	He	leaned	down	to	look
at	my	face.
Ah!	It	is	Bhadra.	My	friend,	perhaps	the	only	friend	left,	but	I	do	not	know	if	I
can	call	him	my	friend.	He	was	my	servant,	a	foot	soldier	to	start	with.	Then	he
got	 lost	 somewhere	 along	 the	 way.	 He	 strolled	 in	 and	 out	 of	 my	 life,	 was
sometimes	missing	for	years	together.	Bhadra	had	access	to	my	private	camp	when
I	was	the	head	of	a	troop	that	resembled	a	wayside	gang	of	robbers	rather	than	a
revolutionary	army.	Then,	he	had	had	access	to	my	private	chambers	when	I	was
the	 King	 of	 a	 small	 island.	 Finally,	 he	 had	 access	 to	 my	 bedroom	 when	 I	 was
ruling	India.	More	than	that,	Bhadra	had	access	to	the	dark	corners	of	my	mind,	a
part	 that	 I	 hid	 from	 my	 brothers,	 my	 wife,	 my	 lover,	 my	 people,	 and	 even	 from
myself.
What	is	Bhadra	doing	here?	But	why	am	I	surprised?	This	is	just	the	place	for
people	like	him,	who	move	about	in	the	shadows.	I	can	hear	him	sobbing.	Bhadra
getting	emotional?	He	was	never	angry,	sad	or	happy.	He	acted	as	if	he	was	very
emotional	now.	But	I	knew	he	had	no	emotions.	And	Bhadra	was	aware	I	knew.
Bhadra,	carry	me	away	from	here.	Take	me	away	to…My	strength	fails	me.	I	do
not	know	whether	the	words	were	spoken	or	died	a	silent	death	somewhere	in	my
throat.	Bhadra	shakes	his	head.	I	am	cold,	extremely	cold.	My	life	is	ebbing	out	of
me.	Then	Bhadra	hugs	my	head	to	his	bosom.	I	can	smell	his	sweat.	Pain	shoots
through	me	from	every	angle	and	spreads	its	poisonous	tentacles	into	my	veins.	I
groan.	Bhadra	lays	me	back	on	the	wet	earth	–	wet	from	my	blood,	the	blood	of
my	people,	the	blood	of	my	dreams,	and	the	blood	of	my	life.	It	is	over.	A	sense	of

sadness	and	emptiness	descends	upon	me.
“I	 will	 complete	 your	 work,	 Your	 Highness.	 Go	 in	 peace.	 I	 will	 do	 it	 for	 our
race.	My	methods	may	be	different,	even	ignoble,	compared	to	your’s.	I	too	was
once	a	warrior	but	I	have	grown	old.	Arms	frighten	me	now.	I	am	terrified	of	war.
I	 cannot	 even	 hurt	 a	 child.	 Nevertheless,	 my	 methods	 are	 deadly.	 I	 will	 avenge
you,	me,	and	our	blighted	race.	Rama	will	not	go	free	for	what	he	has	done	to	us.
Believe	me	and	go	in	peace.”
I	did	not	hear	most	of	what	Bhadra	said.	Strangely	however,	I	was	soothed	and
slipped	away	from	this	foul-smelling	Asura	and	drifted	back	to	my	childhood.	A
thousand	 images	 rushed	 to	 me.	 My	 early	 struggles,	 the	 pangs	 of	 love	 and
abandonment,	separation,	battles	and	wars,	music	and	art,	they	flashed	through	my
mind	in	no	particular	order,	making	no	sense.	Meaningless,	like	life	itself.
I	 sensed	 Bhadra	 bowing	 down	 to	 touch	 my	 feet,	 then	 walking	 away.	 I	 wanted
him	to	call	him	back	and	take	me	to	a	doctor	who	would	put	my	intestines	back,	fit
my	dangling	left	eye	back	into	its	socket	and	somehow	blow	life	into	my	body.	I
wanted	to	withdraw	to	the	Sahyas	forests	in	the	mainland	and	start	a	guerilla	war,
as	 Mahabali	 had	 done	 years	 ago.	 I	 wanted	 to	 start	 again.	 I	 wanted	 to	 make	 the
same	mistakes,	 love	 the	same	people,	fight	the	same	enemies,	befriend	the	same
friends,	marry	the	same	wives	and	sire	the	same	sons.	I	wanted	to	live	the	same
life	again.	I	did	not	want	the	seat	Rama	has	reserved	for	me	in	his	heaven.	I	only
wanted	this	beautiful	earth.
I	knew	it	was	not	going	to	happen.	I	was	sixty,	not	sixteen.	If	I	lived,	I	would	be
a	 one-eyed,	 dirty,	 old	 beggar	 in	 some	 wayside	 temple,	 wearing	 stinking	 and
tattered	clothes	–	a	long	way	from	what	I	once	was.	I	wanted	to	die	now.	I	wanted
this	to	end.	I	wanted	to	go	away.	Let	the	burning	cities	take	care	of	themselves.	Let
the	 Asuras	 fight	 their	 own	 wars	 and	 be	 damned	 along	 with	 the	 Devas.	 I	 only
wanted	 to	 return	 to	 my	 childhood	 and	 start	 over	 again,	 every	 single	 damn	 thing,
again	and	again,	and	again…

