Praises	for	Ajaya	2	Rise	of	Kali
•	I	really	hope	that	someone	makes	a	movie	out	of	this	book	and	offers	me	a	role	in	it.	I	would	love	to
be	a	part	of	such	an	epic.
~	Actor	Nagarjuna	at	the	book	launch	of	Ajaya	2	Rise	of	Kali
•	Anand’s	books	revisit	mythology	with	a	different	perspective	and	presents	a	counter	point.	Ajaya	2
Rise	of	Kali	looks	at	the	epic	Mahabharatha	from	Duryodhana’s	perspective.
~The	Hindu
•	Religion	is	a	sensitive	subject.	Merely	talking	about	it	n	a	public	space	could	land	you	in	trouble.
But	 then	 there	 is	 Anand	 Neelakantan,	 not	 simply	 expressing	 his	 thoughts	 on	 epics	 like	 the	 Ramayana
and	the	Mahabharata,	but	actually	writing	them,	and	from	the	villain’s	perspective.
~	The	Asian	Ag e
•	With	his	style	of	counter-telling	the	popular	myths,	Neelakantan	has	tried	to	lighten	the	grey	of	the
great	villains	of	our	mythological	scriptures	like	Ravana	and	Duryodhana.	The	author	of	the	popular
books	‘Asura:	Tale	of	the	Vanquished’	and	‘Ajaya:	Roll	of	the	Dice’,	Anand	Neelakantan,	has	come	up
with	the	latter	half	of	the	‘Epic	of	the	Kaurava’	called	the	‘Rise	of	Kali’.	Even	though	it’s	just	his	third
novel,	he	has	managed	to	reserve	a	slot	on	the	bestsellers	shelf	for	his	books.
~	DNA
•	An	exciting	characteristic	of	Anand’s	novels	is	his	in-depth	recreation	of	characters	involved	in	the
epic;	 he	 gets	 beneath	 the	 skin	 of	 each,	 taking	 an	 impartial	 view	 of	 the	 circumstances,	 with	 telling
insights	and	colourful	imagery.
~	Supremacy
•	It	is	unusual	to	read	an	Indian	epic	written	differently.	Turning	a	villain	into	a	much-loved	hero	is
the	idea	penned	down	by	Indian	author	Anand	Neelakantan.	He	is	an	engineer	by	profession	but	more
famous	for	his	novels.
~	The	Hans	India
•	The	monsoon’s	most	awaited	mythological	thriller	Ajaya	2	by	Anand	Neelakantan	has	broken	into
the	the	Top	10	Bestseller	list	of	the	Asian	Age	and	looks	down	from	a	comfortable	pedestal	at	its	number
3	spot	in	the	Crossword	bestseller	list.	The	book	was	launched	to	a	veritable	frenzy	of	expectation	and
delight	and	broke	sales	records	on	Anand’s	previous	betsellers	within	a	week.
~	Mumbai	Messeng er
•	 Author	 Anand	 Neelakantan	 has	 done	 it	 again-	 turned	 the	 greatest	 heroes	 and	 villains	 from	 the
Hindu	epics	into	mere	mortals	with	his	new	novel
~	4 8	Hrs,	Hindustan	Times

•	 Get	 set	 to	 unlearn	 the	 Mahabharata	 as	 you	 know	 it	 from	 bedtime	 with	 your	 grandparents.	 In
Anand	 Neelakantan’s	 version	 of	 the	 epic,	 the	 Pandavas	 step	 out	 of	 their	 goody-two	 shoes	 while
Duryodhana,	head	of	the	rival	faction	of	Kauravas,	earns	a	halo.
~	Mid-Day

Yudhishtra	to	Drupada:	
Dharma	is	subtle	and	we	do	not	understand	it.	We	faithfully	
follow	the	path	tread	by	our	predecessors.	My	voice	does	not	
speak	untruth,	nor	does	my	mind	dwell	in	adharma.
Duryodhana	to	Krishna	(Sabha	Parva):	
I	know	what	(your)	dharma	is.	I	know	what	you	call	adharma	
is.	Yet	I	follow	my	heart.	If	you	are	Janardhana,	it	is	you	who	
dwell	in	my	heart	and	make	me	do	what	I	feel.	Is	it	not	my	
Kshatriya	dharma	to	protect	what	is	mine?
Krishna	to	Arjuna	in	the	Bhagavad	Gita:	
O	Partha,	that	intelligence	which	is	covered	by	darkness,	
believes	that	adharma	is	dharma	and	gets	all	meanings	
backwards.	That	is	ignorant	intelligence.
Bhishma	to	Yudhishtra	(Anusashana	Parva):	
But	it	is	not	always	easy	for	mere	mortals	to	arrive	at	
dharma-vinischaya	(definition	of	dharma).	Only	kala	(time	or	
Yama,	the	God	of	Time	or	Yamam),	knows	what	is	dharma	and	
adharma.
Krishna	in	the	Bhagavad	Gita:	
I	AM	TIME.
***

ISBN	978-93-81576-04-5
©	Anand	Neelakantan,	2015
Layouts:	Chandravadan	R.	Shiroorkar	-	Leadstart	Design
Cover:	Kunal	Kundu
Printing:	Thomson	Press	(India)	Limited
Published	in	India	2015	by
PLATINUM	PRESS
An	imprint	of
LEADSTART	PUBLISHING	PVT	LTD
Unit	25-26,	Building	A/1,	Near	Wadala	RTO,
Wadala	(E),	Mumbai	–	400	037,	INDIA
T	+	91	22	2404	6887	
W	www.leadstartcorp.com
All	rights	reserved	worldwide
No	 part	 of	 this	 publication	 may	 be	 reproduced,	 stored	 in	 or	 introduced	 into	 a	 retrieval	 system,	 or
transmitted,	 in	 any	 form,	 or	 by	 any	 means	 (electronic,	 mechanical,	 photocopying,	 recording	 or
otherwise),	without	the	prior	permission	of	the	Publisher.	Any	person	who	commits	an	unauthorised	act
in	relation	to	this	publication	can	be	liable	to	criminal	prosecution	and	civil	claims	for	damages.	
Disclaimer	This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	The	contents	of	this	book	are	the	expressions	and	opinions	of	its
author	and	a	work	of	imagination.	It	does	not	claim	scriptural	or	historical	authenticity.	This	work	does
not	 represent	 the	 views	 of	 the	 Publisher	 nor	 endorses	 them	 in	 any	 way.	 The	 Publisher	 makes	 no
representations	or	warranties	as	to	the	completeness	or	accuracy	of	the	information	used.

To	the	loving	memory
of	my	beloved	mother,
D.	Chellammal	Neelakantan,
who	left	us	on	Thiruvonam	day.

ABOUT	THE	AUTHOR
I	 WAS	 BORN	 IN	 A	 QUAINT	little	village	called	Thripunithura,	on	the

outskirts	of	Cochin,	Kerala.	Located	east	of	mainland	Ernakulam,
across	Vembanad	Lake,	this	village	had	the	distinction	of	being	the	seat	of	the
Cochin	royal	family.	However,	it	was	once	more	famous	for	its	hundred-odd
temples,	 the	 various	 classical	 artists	 it	 produced,	 and	 its	 music	 school.	 I
remember	many	an	evening	listening	to	the	faint	rhythm	of	chendas	from	the
temples	and	the	notes	of	the	flute	escaping	over	the	rugged	walls	of	the	school
of	music.	However,	in	recent	times,	Gulf	money	and	the	rapidly	expanding	city
of	 Cochin	 have	 wiped	 away	 all	 remaining	 vestiges	 of	 that	 old	 world	 charm.
The	 village	 has	 evolved	 into	 the	 usual,	 unremarkable,	 suburban	 hellhole,
clones	of	which	dot	India.
Growing	 up	 in	 a	 village	 with	 more	 temples	 than	 was	 necessary,	 it	 was	 little
wonder	 that	 mythology	 fascinated	 me.	 Ironically,	 I	 was	 drawn	 to	 the	 antiheroes.	 Life	 went	 on…I	 became	 an	 engineer,	 joined	 the	 Indian	 Oil
Corporation,	 moved	 to	 Bangalore,	 married	 Aparna,	 and	 welcomed	 my
daughter	 Ananya,	 and	 son,	 Abhinav.	 But	 the	 voices	 of	 yore	 refused	 to	 be
silenced.	I	felt	impelled	to	narrate	the	stories	of	the	vanquished	and	the	damned,
and	 give	 life	 to	 those	 silent	 heroes,	 we	 have	 overlooked	 in	 our	 uncritical
acceptance	of	the	conventional	renderings	of	our	epics.
This	 is	 Anand’s	 third	 book	 and	 follows	 the	 outstanding	 success	 of	 his	 #1
bestsellers,	ASURA	Tale	Of	The	Vanquished	and	AJAYA	Book	I,	Roll	Of	The
Dice.	Anand	can	be	reached	at:	mail@asura.co.in

CONTENTS
Author ’s	Note
Select	Cast	of	Characters
Genealogy
Prelude	~	ROLL	OF	THE	DICE
1	SHAME
2	ESCAPE
3	ARREST
4	THE	CHALLENGE
5	GANDHARA	BECKONS
6	DARKNESS
7	SERPENT	HUNT
8	REFUGE
9	TRAPPED
10	AHIMSA
11	THE	CHASE
12	DIGVIJAYA
13	THE	FEAST
14	GURU	AND	DISCIPLE
15	SON	OF	A	RAKSHASI
16	LESSER	MEN
17	DARK	PRINCE
18	NISHADA’S	DAUGHTER
19	THE	MERCHANT

20	FISSURES
21	VICTORS	AND	THE	VANQUISHED
22	RETURN	OF	THE	MLECHA
23	THE	POET
24	DIFFERENT	GODS
25	THE	PROPOSAL
26	SON	OF	GOD
27	LUSTFUL	EYES
28	MISSION	DANGEROUS
29	SONS	OF	FORTUNE
30	THE	BOY	LOVER
31	KIRATHARJUNEEYAM
32	THE	STALKER
33	VENGEANCE
34	VANARAPUTRA
35	THE	WRETCHED
36	RETRIBUTION
37	A	DAUGHTER’S	HONOUR
38	DEATH	IN	THE	DARK
39	SOLITARY	SOUL
40	RANSOM
41	VIRATA
42	DATES	OF	DESTINY
43	MURDER
44	THE	MESSENGER
45	WINDS	OF	WAR

46	THE	SONG	OF	GOD
47	THE	SONG	OF	MAN
48	THE	GREAT	SECRET
49	WAR	GAMES
50	RELUCTANT	WARRIORS
51	IRAVAN
52	KSHATRIYA
53	LOVE	RETURNS
54	RULES	OF	WAR
55	DHARMAKSHETRA
56	THE	SCEPTIC
57	THE	FIRST	EIGHT	DAYS
58	TRAITOR
59	LIABILITY	OF	CONSCIENCE
60	EUNUCH	SHIELD
61	SURYAPUTRA
62	GANGADATTA
63	END	OF	A	POEM
64	WHEEL	OF	DEATH
65	WARRIOR’S	HONOUR
66	HALF	DHARMA
67	LIES
68	DHANAVEERA
69	RAKSHASA
70	DEATH	OF	A	MLECHA
71	WHEEL	OF	DHARMA

72	THE	KILL
73	THE	LAKE
74	OORUBHANGA
75	THE	OWL’S	REVENGE
76	THE	CURSED
77	JAYA
78	TASTE	OF	DHARMA
79	VANAPRASTHA
80	LONG	LIVE	THE	REVOLUTION
81	FRUITS	OF	KARMA
82	THE	HUNTER
83	HEAVEN	CALLS
84	GRAND	ALLIANCE
85	RISE	OF	KALI
Afterword	~	DHARMA,	A	SUBTLE	CONCEPT
Suggested	Reading
Glossary
Acknowledgements

AUTHOR’S	NOTE
WHY	WRITE	ABOUT	THE	DEFEATED?

In	the	first	volume	of	Ajaya,	I	elaborated	on	my	reasons	for	choosing	to	write
the	Mahabharata	story	from	Duryodhana’s	perspective.	Since	its	publication,	I
have	 received	 numerous	 e-mails	 from	 my	 readers	 –	 some	 critical,	 others
adulatory	or	analytical	of	the	perspective	I	brought	to	the	age-old	epic.	There
were	readers	who	were	unhappy	that	I	had	cast	Krishna	in	an	unflattering	light
and	 portrayed	 the	 Pandavas	 in	 a	 negative	 way.	 Hence,	 a	 short	 note	 about	 my
portrayal	of	Krishna	and	the	Pandavas	is	perhaps	merited	here.
I	have	written	Ajaya	from	the	perspective	of	the	vanquished	side	–the	Kauravas.
For	 them,	Krishna	 was	 a	rival,	if	not	 an	enemy.	If	the	Kauravas	had	accepted
Krishna’s	 divinity	 and	 agreed	 to	 whatever	 he	 ordained,	 the	 Mahabharata	 war
would	 not	 have	 taken	 place.	 It	 would	 thus	 be	 unrealistic,	 even	 ridiculous,	 for
the	Kauravas	to	be	seen	worshipping	Krishna.	There	would	have	been	no	story
left	to	tell.	The	great	sage,	Vedavyasa,	never	portrayed	Krishna	as	God	or	an
avatar	in	his	original	version,	Jaya.	It	was	only	later,	in	the	Mahabhagawatam,
that	 he	 is	 seen	 as	 an	 avatar	 of	 Vishnu.	 There	 were	 many	 criticisms	 voiced
about	 Krishna	 in	 the	 Mahabharata.	 Characters	 like	 Shishupala,	 Suyodhana,
Gandhari,	 and	 even	 Balarama,	 his	 brother,	 sometimes	 made	 scathing	 verbal
attacks	on	Krishna.	Vyasa	effectively	used	these	opposing	viewpoints	to	create
a	rounded	story.
The	 Mahabharata,	 in	 essence,	 is	 a	 narrative	 without	 a	 hero.	 Rather,	 every
character	is	a	hero.	I	suspect	the	sage	Vyasa	adopted	the	title	Jaya	for	his	great
epic	in	order	to	point	out	the	irony	of	violence	and	a	war	in	which	no	one	wins.
For	 me,	 Jaya	 is	 an	 anti-war	 story.	 I	 have	 condensed	 the	 Gita	 and	 placed	 it
slightly	 ahead	 in	 the	 conventional	 storyline,	 as	 a	 conversation	 between
Balarama	 and	 Krishna.	 The	 two	 brothers,	 though	 they	 loved	 each	 other,	 had
many	disagreements	over	the	Kauravas	and	Pandavas.	While	Krishna	favoured
Arjuna,	 Suyodhana	 was	 Balarama’s	 favourite.	 In	 this	 rendering,	 Balarama
denounces	Krishna	before	the	war	for	the	violence	he	is	trying	to	unleash.	But
for	Krishna,	it	is	the	call	of	duty	and	dharma.	I	have	used	this	space	to	imagine
how	 the	conversation	between	Balarama	and	Krishna	might	have	gone.	Here,
as	in	the	original,	Krishna	is	unable	to	convince	Balarama	about	the	necessity

for	 a	 war;	 this	 would	 have	 been	 an	 argument	 between	 two	 great	 intellects.	 I
have	 used	 this	 space	 to	 voice	 Balarama’s	 doubts	 as	 he	 speaks	 to	 Krishna.
Rather,	they	are	my	own	doubts	on	reading	the	Gita.	 I	plead	guilty	to	 putting
my	 words	 into	 Balarama’s	 mouth,	 and	 occasionally	 Arjuna’s.	 Vedvyasa	 just
says	Krishna	and	Balarama	disagreed	about	the	war	and	that	Balarama	went	on
a	 pilgrimage	 when	 it	 took	 place.	 I	 have	 included	 the	 Gita	 in	 its	 conventional
space,	though	some	of	the	doubts	Arjuna	airs	are	my	own.	The	original	Gita	is
a	conversation	between	a	mentor	and	mentee,	when	Krishna	convinces	Arjuna
to	fight	the	war.
As	I	have	stated	in	the	many	interviews	I	have	given	and	articles	I	have	written,
I	 am	 a	 seeker;	 my	 stories	 are	 more	 about	 questions	 than	 answers.	 I	 claim
neither	the	intellect	nor	the	scholarship	to	make	a	critical	analysis	of	the	 Gita,
words	 which	 have	 inspired	 countless	 men	 and	 women	 over	 the	 centuries.	 My
questions	are	mundane	and	ordinary,	like	the	doubts	that	gnaw	at	a	child’s	mind
when	 an	 adult	 tells	 him	 wonderful	 stories.	 The	 child	 knows	 the	 stories	 are
fascinating	 but	 curiosity	 still	 makes	 him	 ask	 questions	 for	 a	 better
understanding.
Recently,	on	the	auspicious	occasion	of	Thiruvonam,	the	day	the	great	Asura
emperor,	Mahabali	(Lord	Vishnu,	in	his	Vamana	avatar	had	banished	Mahabali
to	 patala,	 the	 underworld),	 comes	 to	 visit	 his	 people	 on	 earth,	 I	 suffered	 a
shattering	 personal	 loss	 when	 my	 mother	 passed	 away.	 I	 sought	 solace	 in
Krishna’s	message	in	the	Gita,	but	the	analogy	of	the	atma	(soul)	departing	the
body	as	being	nothing	but	a	change	of	clothes,	did	not	give	me	any	comfort.
Death	is	real	and	devastating	and	no	intellectual	circus	can	take	away	the	pain
of	the	people	who	are	left	behind.	When	the	rituals	were	over	and	my	mother ’s
ashes	 sent	 to	 Kashi	 for	 immersion	 in	 the	 Ganga,	 I	 was	 left	 feeling	 bitter	 and
bereft.	 I	 asked	 the	 chief	 priest	 of	 my	 village,	 who	 had	 conducted	 the	 rituals,
whether	there	was	any	meaning	in	such	customs.	In	response,	he	told	me	this
story:
Mandana	Misra	was	a	great	scholar	and	authority	on	the	Vedas	and	Mimasa.	He
led	a	householder ’s	life	(grihastha),	with	his	scholar-philosopher	wife,	Ubhaya
Bharati,	in	the	town	of	Mahishi,	in	what	is	present-day	northern	Bihar.	Husband
and	 wife	 would	 have	 great	 debates	 on	 the	 veracity	 of	 the	 Vedas,	 the
Upanishads,	 the	Gita	 and	 other	 philosophical	 works.	 Scholars	 from	 all	 over

Bharatavarsha	came	to	debate	and	understand	the	Shastras	with	them.	It	is	said
that	even	the	parrots	in	Mandana’s	home	debated	the	divinity,	or	its	lack,	in	the
Vedas	and	Upanishads.
Mandana	was	a	staunch	believer	in	rituals.	One	day,	while	he	was	performing
Pitru	Karma	 (rituals	 for	 deceased	 ancestors),	 Adi	 Shankaracharya	 arrived	 at
his	home	and	demanded	a	debate	on	Advaita.	Mandana	was	angry	at	the	rude
intrusion	and	asked	the	Acharya	whether	he	was	not	aware,	as	a	Brahmin,	that	it
was	 inauspicious	 to	 come	 to	 another	 Brahmin’s	 home	 uninvited	 when	 Pitru
Karma	was	being	done?	In	reply,	Adi	Shankara	asked	Mandana	whether	he	was
sure	of	the	value	of	such	rituals.	This	enraged	Mandana	and	the	other	Brahmins
present.	 Thus	 began	 one	 of	 the	 most	 celebrated	 debates	 in	 Hindu	 thought.	 It
raged	 for	 weeks	 between	 the	 two	 great	 scholars.	 As	 the	 only	 other	 person	 of
equal	intellect	to	Shankara	and	Mandana	was	Mandana’s	wife,	Ubhaya	Bharati,
she	 was	 appointed	 the	 adjudicator.	 Among	 other	 things,	 Shankara	 convinced
Mandana	 that	 the	 rituals	 for	 the	 dead	 had	 little	 value	 to	 the	 dead.	 Mandana
became	 Adi	 Shankara’s	 disciple	 (and	 later	 the	 first	 Shankaracharya	 of	 the
Sringeri	Math	in	Karnataka).
When	the	priest	related	this	story	to	me,	I	was	shocked.	He	was	not	giving	me
the	answer	I	had	expected.	Annoyed,	I	asked	him	what	he	meant	by	the	story	if
Adi	Shankara	himself	said	such	rituals	were	of	no	use	to	the	dead.	The	priest
replied,	“Son,	the	story	has	not	ended.”	And	he	continued...	A	few	years	later,
Adi	Shankara	was	 compiling	 the	rituals	for	the	dead,	to	standardize	them	for
people	across	Bharatavarsha.	Mandana,	upset	with	his	Guru’s	action,	asked	Adi
Shankara	 why	 he	 was	 involved	 with	 such	 a	 useless	 thing.	 After	 all,	 the	 Guru
had	 convinced	 him	 of	 the	 uselessness	 of	 such	 rituals	 (Lord	 Krishna	 also
mentions	 the	 inferiority	 of	 Vedic	 sacrifice	 to	 other	 paths,	 in	 the	 Gita.	 Pitru
karma	has	no	vedic	base	either).	Why	 then	was	the	Jagad	Guru	taking	such	a
retrograde	step?	Adi	Shankaracharya	smiled	at	his	disciple	and	answered,	“The
rituals	are	not	for	the	dead	but	for	the	loved	ones	left	behind.”
This	demonstrates	how	critical	thinking	is	the	basis	of	all	our	philosophy.	We
have	 no	 concept	 of	 blasphemy.	 This	 openness	 to	 criticism	 is	 what	 makes	 the
Hindu	 religion	 and	 its	 traditions	 unique.	 Vyasa	 did	 not	 hide	 Krishna’s	 faults,
nor	 did	 Valmiki	 remain	 silent	 on	 Rama’s	 shortcomings.	 This	 openness	 to
debate	and	discussion	has	helped	us	evolve	over	time	and	withstand	thousands

of	 years	 of	 foreign	 rule,	 reforming	 as	 the	 times	 demanded.	 Otherwise,
Hinduism	would	long	have	been	dead,	like	the	ancient	religions	of	Greece	and
Egypt.	It	is	said	that	for	every	village	there	is	a	Ramayana	and	for	every	person
there	is	a	Gita.	In	chapter	18:63,	Lord	Krishna	says:
iti	te	jñānam	ākhyātam
guhyād	guhyataram	mayā
vimriśyaitad	aśeshena
yathecchasi	tathā	kuru
[I	have	given	you	the	most	confidential	of	all	knowledge.	Analyze	it	critically
and	act	as	per	your	wish	and	understanding.]
Krishna	does	not	ask	Arjuna	to	follow	blindly,	nor	threaten	him	with	hell	if	he
disobeys.	In	voicing	my	own	doubts,	I	too	have	followed	Krishna’s	advice	by
critically	analyzing	 the	Mahabharata.	I	 hope	that	those	who	possess	a	 deeper
understanding	and	knowledge	of	the	epic	will	aid	me	in	finding	answers	to	the
questions	which	have	 troubled	 me.	I	 believe	I	am	not	alone	in	my	occasional
puzzlement.	 Some	 of	 my	 readers	 certainly	 share	 my	 doubts.	 I	 request	 you	 to
bear	in	mind	that	this	is	a	work	of	fiction,	in	the	best	Indian	tradition	of	 VadaPrathivada.	 The	 Gurus	 of	 yesteryears	 opined	 that	 the	 best	 way	 to	 understand
something	is	to	debate	it.	I	have	rolled	my	dice	with	the	prayer:
vimriśyaitad	aśeshena
yathecchasi	tathā	kuru
[Analyze	it	critically	and	act	as	per	your	wish	and	understanding.]
*****

SELECT	CAST	OF	CHARACTERS
Aswathama:	 Suyodhana’s	 close	 friend	 and	 son	 of	 Guru	 Drona,	 this	 Brahmin	 youth	 refuses	 to	 blindly
follow	tradition.	He	believes	Suyodhana’s	cause	is	just	and	is	willing	to	fight	even	his	illustrious	father.	He
views	Arjuna	as	his	arch	foe.
Balarama:	Leader	of	the	Yadava	clan,	an	idealistic	dreamer	who	wishes	to	bring	prosperity	to	his	people
and	belives	in	the	equality	of	all	men.	He	sees	the	path	to	progress	as	lying	in	farming	and	trade.	A	pacifist
at	heart,	he	builds	an	ideal	city	on	the	west	coast	of	Bharatavarsha,	where	he	puts	his	ideas	into	practice.
He	 longs	 to	 prove	 one	 can	 rule	 without	 compromising	 one’s	 principles.	 Krishna	 and	 Subhadra’s	 elder
brother,	he	is	also	Suyodhana’s	Guru-mentor,	and	inspires	men	like	Karna	to	reach	beyond	the	limitations
of	caste.
Bhishma:	 Grand	 Regent	 of	 the	 Kuru	 clan	 and	 granduncle	 to	 both	 the	 Pandavas	 and	 Kauravas.	 Also
known	as	Gangadatta	Devavrata.	Referred	to	here	as	the	Grand	Regent	or	Bhishma,	a	name	acquired	after
he	took	a	vow	of	celibacy	and	relinquished	his	claim	to	the	throne,	as	a	precondition	to	his	father	marrying
Satyavathi,	a	fisherwoman	(who	had	another	son,	Krishna	Dwaipayana	Vedavyasa,	prior	to	this	marriage).
Dhaumya:	An	ambitious	and	unscrupulous	Priest,	he	is	Parashurama’s	eyes,	ears	and	arm	in	Hastinapura.
His	aim	is	a	perfect	society	where	Priests	will	decree	and	the	rest	follow.	He	is	Kunti	and	Yudhishtra’s	chief
advisor.
Dhritarashtra:	 Son	 of	 Vedavyasa,	 he	 is	 the	 legitimate,	 though	 blind,	 King	 of	 Hastinapura,	 and	 father	 of
the	Kauravas.	Denied	the	Kingship	due	to	his	blindness,	Pandu	(his	albino	younger	brother),	reigns	instead;
on	his	death,	Dhritarashtra	assumes	the	Kingship	nominally,	with	Bhishma	as	Grand	Regent.
Draupadi:	 The	 wife	 shared	 by	 the	 five	 Pandava	 brothers.	 Dhristadyumna	 is	 her	 brother,	 and	 Shikandi	 (a
eunuch),	is	an	adopted	sibling.	She	is	spirited	and	does	not	take	insults	quietly.	Fiercely	determined,	she	is
perhaps	the	real	‘man’	in	the	Pandava	camp.
Durjaya:	A	man	of	the	gutters,	he	rules	the	dark	underworld	of	Hastinapura.	A	crime	lord,	he	engineers
riots	and	is	in	the	pay	of	the	Gandhara	Prince,	Shakuni.
Ekalavya:	 A	 tribal	 youth	 who	 desperately	 wants	 to	 become	 a	 warrior,	 he	 is	 ready	 to	 give	 his	 life	 to
achieve	some	dignity	for	his	people.
Gandhari:	 Princess	 of	 Gandhara,	 Bhishma	 forcibly	 carries	 her	 off	 to	 marry	 his	 blind	 nephew,
Dhritarashtra.	She	voluntary	chooses	to	bind	her	eyes	to	share	her	husband’s	blindness.	She	is	the	mother
of	Crown	Prince	Suyodhana	and	his	brothers,	the	Kauravas.	Her	brother	is	Shakuni.
General	 Hiranyadhanus:	 Father	 of	 Ekalavya	 and	 Commander-in-Chief	 of	 Jarasandha’s	 army,	 he	 has
risen	from	the	lowliest	Nishada	caste	by	dint	of	his	own	merit	and	the	friendship	of	King	Jarasandha.
Guru	Drona:	Teacher	to	both	the	Pandavas	and	Kauravas;	and	Aswathama’s	father,	he	will	do	anything	to
make	Arjuna	the	greatest	warrior	in	the	world.	His	love	for	his	disciple	is	legendary,	exceeded	only	by	his
love	 for	 his	 son.	 Orthodox	 to	 the	 core,	 he	 believes	 in	 the	 superiority	 of	 his	 caste	 and	 that	 no	 low	 castes
should	have	the	privilege	of	knowledge.	The	poverty	of	his	early	life	haunts	him.
Indra:	 The	 last	 king	 of	 the	 Deva	 Empire,	 he	 lives	 in	 penury	 in	 the	 forest.	 He	 wishes	 to	 make	 a	 secret
weapon	for	Arjuna,	without	which	he	fears	his	son	is	doomed.
Iravan:	 Son	 of	 Arjuna	 and	 the	 Naga	 princess	 Uloopi.	 In	 the	 north	 Indian	 versions	 of	 the	 Mahabharata,
Iravan	is	a	minor	character	who	dies	a	heroic	death	on	the	18 th	day	of	the	war.	In	the	south	Indian	versions
of	 the	 epic,	 Iravan	 is	 the	 epitome	 of	 sacrifice,	 who	 gives	 his	 life	 before	 the	 war	 to	 aid	 victory	 for	 the
Pandavas.	He	is	worshipped	as	a	major	village	deity	in	the	South.
Jarasandha:	The	King	of	Magadha.	In	his	kingdom,	merit	rules	instead	of	caste.
Jayadratha:	King	of	Sindh,	he	is	Suyodhana’s	brother-in-law.
Karna:	A	low-caste	Suta	and	son	of	a	charioteer,	he	is	willing	to	travel	to	the	Deep	South	to	become	a
warrior	 par	 excellence.	 Generous,	 charitable,	 exceptionally	 gifted,	 he	 is	 Suyodhana’s	 answer	 to	 Arjuna’s

challenge.	 He	 is	 spurned	 for	 his	 low	 birth	 and	 insulted	 by	 Draupadi,	 but	 Suyodhana	 staunchly	 stands	 by
him.
The	Kauravas:	The	legitimate	scions	of	the	Kuru	clan	that	holds	suzerainty	over	all	the	kingdoms	north
of	 the	 Vindhya	 ranges.	 Crown	 Prince	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 siblings	 are	 determined	 to	 hold	 on	 to	 what	 is
rightfully	theirs.
ƀ	 	 Suyodhana:	 Meaning	 ‘one	 who	 cannot	 be	 easily	 conquered’,	 the	 eldest	 Kaurava	 (Dhritarashtra	 and
Gandhari’s	firstborn),	is	the	legitimate	Crown	Prince	of	Hastinapura.	This	book	narrates	his	fight	to	claim	his
birthright.	Perhaps	the	most	celebrated	villain	in	Indian	mythology	after	Ravana	of	the	Ramayana,	we	see
him	here	as	loyal,	generous,	brash	and	arrogant,	his	mind	set	against	the	taboos	and	convoluted	arguments
of	orthodoxy.
ƀ				Sushasana:	Suyodhana’s	next	sibling,	more	famous	as	Dushasana.
ƀ			Sushala:	The	only	girl	child	among	the	Kauravas,	she	is	known	as	Dushala	in	popular	lore,	she	is	also
the	loving	wife	of	Jayadratha,	King	of	Sindh.
Khatotkacha:	Son	of	Bhima	and	Rakshasi	Hidumbi.
Kripa:	 A	 maverick	 genius	 as	 well	 as	 a	 learned	 Brahmin	 warrior,	 he	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 caste.	 He	 is
Drona’s	 brother-in-law	 (his	 opposite),	 and	 Aswathama’s	 uncle.	 He	 believes	 Suyodhana	 has	 a	 point.	 A
carefree	 soul	 without	 boundaries,	 he	 is	 outspoken	 to	 the	 point	 of	 arrogance	 but	 kind-hearted	 beneath	 his
rough	exterior.	He	believes	knowledge	ought	to	be	shared	freely.
Krishna:	A	Yadava	Prince	who	many	consider	an	avatar	of	Vishnu	–	one	of	the	Hindu	Trinity.	He	believes
he	has	come	to	save	the	world	from	evil.	He	is	also	Arjuna’s	brother-in-law	and	mentor.	He	sees	the	Great
War	 as	 an	 inevitable	 conflict	 for	dharma	 to	 be	 reinstated.	 His	 greatest	 challenges	 come	 from	 men	 like
Jarasandha,	Suyodhana,	Karna,	Ekalavya	and	Carvaka.
Krishna	 [black]	 Dwaipayana	 [born	 on	 an	 island]	 Vedavyasa	 [chronicler	 of	 the	 Vedas]:	 The	 great
scholar-author	 of	 the	 Mahabharata,	 the	 Mahabhagavatha	 (the	 longest	 epic	 in	 the	 world),	 and	 18
Puranas.	 He	 codified	 and	 edited	 the	 Vedas	 and	 is	 considered	 the	 patron	 saint	 of	 all	 writers.	 Son	 of
Satyavathi,	a	fisherwoman	and	Parashara,	a	Brahmin	saint,	he	is	the	Grand	Regent’s	stepbrother.	He	is	also
the	 biological	 father	 of	 Pandu,	 Dhritarashtra	 and	 Vidhura,	 and	 hence	 the	 grandfather	 of	 all	 the	 main
protagonists	of	the	Mahabharata.
Kunti:	 First	 wife	 of	 Pandu	 and	 collective	 mother	 of	 the	 Pandavas,	 she	 has	 an	 illegitimate	 son	 as	 well.
Ambitious,	 ruthless,	 and	 self-righteous,	 she	 is	 determined	 to	 ensure	 Yudhishtra	 succeeds	 to	 the	 throne	 of
Hastinapura.
Mayasura:	A	great	architect	and	a	low-caste	Asura.
Pandu:	Dhritarashtra’s	younger	brother	and	briefly	King	of	Hastinapura	until	his	premature	death.	Cursed
never	to	have	marital	relations,	his	two	wives,	Kunti	and	Madri,	are	impregnated	by	sages	and	Gods.	There
are,	however,	enough	hints	in	the	Mahabharata	that	their	five	sons	were	not,	in	fact,	of	divine	origin.	The
sons,	 called	 the	 Pandavas,	 are	 recognized	 as	 Pandu’s	 sons	 though	 he	 did	 not	 father	 them.	 He	 dies
attempting	sexual	union	with	Madri,	who	commits	sati,	leaving	Kunti	to	care	for	all	five	boys.
The	Pandavas	(Five	Sons	of	Pandu):
ƀ			Yudhishtra	(Dharmaputra):	The	eldest,	was	born	to	Kunti,	fathered	by	Dharma	or	Yama,	the	God	of
Death.	His	claim	to	the	throne	of	Hastinapura	rests	on	the	fact	that	he	is	considered	Pandu’s	son,	has	divine
lineage,	 and	 is	 older	 than	 Crown	 Prince	 Suyodhana	 by	 a	 day.	 The	 whole	 Mahabharata	 hinges	 on	 this
accident	of	birth.
ƀ			Bhima:	Kunti’s	next	divine	progeny	is	the	Crown	Prince’s	archenemy.	Renowned	for	his	brute	strength,
he	is	ever	ready	to	use	it	on	his	brothers’	behalf.
ƀ			Arjuna:	Youngest	of	Kunti’s	three	divine	sons,	he	is	a	great	archer	and	warrior,	and	Yudhishtra’s	only
hope	of	winning	against	the	Kauravas.
ƀ			Nakula	&	Sahadeva:	Madri’s	twins,	also	of	divine	lineage,	play	minor	roles	in	the	epic	as	sidekicks	to
their	three	older	siblings.
Parashurama:	 Drona,	 Kripa	 and	 Karna’s	 Guru,	 friend-turned-foe	 of	 the	 Grand	 Regent,	 and	 the	 supreme
spiritual	leader	of	the	Southern	Confederate.	A	fanatical	Brahmin	and	the	greatest	living	warrior	of	his	time,

he	 curses	 Karna	 for	 duping	 him	 about	 his	 caste.	 He	 yearns	 to	 defeat	 Hastinapura	 and	 bring	 all	 of
Bharatavarsha	 under	 his	 sway.	 He	 rues	 the	 peace	 treaty	 he	 signed	 with	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 years	 ago	 and
awaits	the	opportunity	to	ignite	a	great	war.
Parshavi:	Vidhura’s	wife.
Purochana:	A	corrupt	but	efficient	bureaucrat	in	league	with	Shakuni.
Samba:	 Son	 of	 Krishna	 and	 the	 Vanara	 woman,	 Jambavati,	 he	 is	 credited	 with	 starting	 the	 civil	 war	 that
destroyed	the	Yadavas,	and	is	often	portrayed	as	irresponsible	and	impulsive.
Shakuni:	Prince	of	Gandhara,	Queen	Gandhari’s	younger	sibling	and	maternal	uncle	to	the	Kauravas,	his
only	 ambition	 is	 the	 destruction	 of	 the	 kingdoms	 of	 Bharatavarsha,	 in	 order	 to	 avenge	 himself	 against
Bhishma	for	sacking	Gandhara,	killing	his	father	and	brothers,	and	abducting	his	sister.	Skilled	at	dice	and
intrigue,	he	always	carries	the	loaded	dice	made	from	the	thighbones	of	his	slain	father.
Subhadra:	Suyodhana’s	first	love,	and	later	wife	of	his	greatest	foe,	Arjuna.
Takshaka:	 Leader	 of	 the	 rebel	 Nagas,	 who	 wishes	 for	 a	 revolution	 whereby	 the	 Shudras	 and
Untouchables	 will	 become	 the	 rulers	 and	 the	 high	 castes	 their	 slaves.	 He	 is	 a	 fierce	 warrior	 and	 a
megalomaniac	dictator	in	the	making.
Uluka:	Son	of	Shakuni.
Vasuki:	Deposed	Naga	king,	he	is	old	and	frail,	but	desperately	wants	the	leadership	back.	He	believes
Takshaka	is	leading	his	people	to	destruction.
Vidhura:	Youngest	of	Bhishma’s	three	nephews,	he	was	born	of	a	lowly	dasi	and	the	sage	Vedavyasa.	A
renowned	 scholar	 and	 gentleman,	 but	 of	 low	 caste,	 he	 is	 the	 Prime	 Minister	 of	 Hastinapura,	 and	 the
conscience-keeper	of	the	Grand	Regent.
Yuyutsu:	The	son	of	Dhritarashtra	and	the	Vaishya	woman,	Sugadha.	He	is	older	than	both	Yudhishtra	and
Suyodhana,	but	never	lays	claim	to	the	throne.	The	merchant-warrior	is	a	master	strategist	and	one	of	the
survivors	of	the	Great	Mahabharata	war.
And	finally,	the	most	important	of	them	all:
Jara	and	his	blind	dog ,	Dharma:	A	deformed	beggar,	Jara	lives	on	the	dusty	streets	of	Hastinapura,	and
sometimes	Dwaraka,	accompanied	by	his	blind	dog,	Dharma.	Illiterate,	ignorant,	frail	and	dirt	poor,	he	is
one	 of	 the	 many	 who	 believe	 in	 the	 divinity	 of	 Krishna.	 He	 is	 a	 fervent	 devotee	 of	 the	 avatar.	 An
Untouchable,	rejected	by	all	and	spurned	by	most,	still	Jara	rejoices	in	the	blessings	of	his	beloved	God
and	celebrates	life.

*****

Prelude
ROLL	O	F	T HE	DICE
	
HASTINAPURA,	 THE	 MOST	 POWERFUL	 EMPIRE	

in	 Bharatavarsha,	 is	 faced	 with
political	strife.	King	Dhritarashtra	is	blind	and	rules	but	in	name.	His	younger
brother,	 Pandu,	 is	 dead.	 Pandu’s	 widow,	 Kunti,	 arrives	 at	 the	 palace	 with	 her
three	sons	–	Yudhishtra,	Bhima	and	Arjuna,	as	well	as	Nakula	and	Sahadeva	–
the	 sons	 of	 her	 co-wife,	 Madri,	 who	 has	 committed	 sati.	 Together,	 the	 five
brothers	 are	 known	 as	 the	 Pandavas,	 or	 the	 sons	 of	 Pandu.	 However,	 it	 is	 an
open	 secret	 that	 Pandu	 was	 cursed	 by	 a	 sage	 never	 to	 have	 marital	 relations.
The	Pandavas	are	thus	not	his	biological	children.
But	 Kunti	 is	 determined	 to	 make	 her	 eldest	 son,	 Yudhishtra,	 the	 next	 King.
Dhritarashtra’s	 foreign-born	 Queen,	 the	 beautiful	 and	 imperious	 Gandhari,
believes	 otherwise,	 and	 sees	 her	 own	 firstborn,	 Suyodhana,	 as	 the	 legitimate
successor.	Crown	Prince	Suyodhana	and	his	99	brothers,	scoff	at	the	Pandava
claims	 and	 call	 them	 bastards.	 In	 desperation,	 Kunti	 claims	 her	 sons	 are	 of
divine	 lineage	 and	 aligns	 herself	 with	 the	 orthodox	 elements	 of	 the	 clergy.
Dhaumya,	an	ambitious	and	cunning	priest,	dons	the	role	of	her	chief	advisor.
Meanwhile,	 Suyodhana,	 a	 headstrong,	 idealistic	 and	 generous-hearted	 youth,
disregards	the	caste	system,	believing	that	only	merit	matters.
The	 new	 martial	 arts	 Guru	 of	 Hastinapura,	 Drona,	 is	 a	 supporter	 of	 Kunti;
Arjuna,	 the	 third	 Pandava	 prince,	 is	 his	 favourite	 student.	 Drona	 arrives	 to
replace	 the	 maverick	 Kripacharya,	 as	 the	 royal	 Guru,	 making	 young
Suyodhana’s	 life	 miserable	 by	 openly	 favouring	 the	 Pandavas.	 However,
Aswathama,	the	Guru’s	son,	becomes	Suyodhana’s	close	friend.
As	 rivalry	 between	 the	 cousins	 escalates,	 there	 are	 attempted	 murders,
allegations	 and	 counter	 allegations.	 The	 air	 is	 thick	 with	 intrigue.	 Civil	 war
looms.	Holding	the	empire	together	is	the	noble	patriarch,	the	Grand	Regent	of
the	Kurus	–	Bhishma	Pitamaha.	He	rules	the	country	with	an	iron	hand,	with	the
help	 of	 his	 scholarly	 and	 able	 Prime	 Minister,	 Vidhura,	 who	 is	 also	 stepbrother	 to	 Dhritarashtra	 and	 Pandu,	 but	 born	 of	 a	 palace	 maid,	 hence

considered	of	lowly	birth.
When	Bhishma	attacked	Gandhara	years	ago	and	forced	Gandhari	to	marry	his
blind	 nephew,	 Dhritarashtra,	 the	 patriarch,	 had	 committed	 a	 grave	 error	 in
sparing	the	life	of	the	young	Gandharan	prince,	Shakuni	–	Gandhari’s	brother.
Shakuni	 has	 vowed	 to	 destroy	 Bharatavarsha	 (India,	 as	 he	 calls	 it).	 He	 is	 a
foreigner,	 despised	 by	 many,	 but	 works	 his	 way	 through	 the	 politics	 of	 the
Hastinapura	court,	moving	his	pieces	dexterously	to	foment	trouble.
As	 the	 orthodox	 elements	 impose	 a	 crushing	 caste	 system	 on	 the	 populace,	 a
revolution	 brews	 in	 the	 forests	 of	 Bharatavarsha	 under	 the	 charismatic
leadership	of	the	Naga	leader,	Takshaka.	Shakuni	secretly	helps	the	elements	of
destabilization,	bringing	the	crime	lord,	Durjaya,	back	into	action.
Ekalavya	 and	 Jara	 are	 untouchable	 Nishadas.	 Ekalavya	 yearns	 to	 become	 an
ace	 archer,	 but	 Guru	 Drona	 rejects	 him	 as	 a	 pupil	 because	 of	 his	 caste.	 He
learns	archery	by	secretly	watching	the	Guru	teaching	the	Hastinapura	princes.
In	time,	his	skill	excels	even	that	of	Arjuna,	Drona’s	favourite.	When	Ekalavya
finally	musters	the	courage	to	demonstrate	his	archery	to	the	Guru,	Drona	asks
him	 to	 cut	 off	 his	 bow	 thumb	 as	 his	 gurudakshina,	 so	 that	 Arjuna	 remains
unchallenged.	Ekalavya	burns	with	hatred	and	vows	to	become	the	better	archer
despite	his	handicap.
Jara	 becomes	 an	 accomplice	 of	 the	 crime	 lord,	 Durjaya.	 His	 life	 would	 have
ended	 in	 the	 gutters	 but	 for	 a	 chance	 encounter	 with	 a	 pious	 Brahmin,	 when
Jara	arrives	to	loot	his	house.	Jara	has	a	change	of	heart	when	he	discovers	that
the	Brahmin	and	his	family	have	been	mercilessly	killed	by	Durjaya’s	men.	He
becomes	a	staunch	devotee	of	the	Yadava	Prince,	Krishna,	whom	many	believe
to	 be	 an	 avatar	 of	 Lord	 Vishnu.	 Thereafter,	 Jara	 roams	 the	 streets	 of
Hastinapura	with	his	blind	dog	Dharma,	singing	paeans	to	Lord	Krishna.
Krishna	 himself	 wants	 a	 stable	 society	 and	 believes	 Suyodhana	 is	 dangerous.
Though	 he	 does	 not	 promote	 caste	 hierarchy,	 Krishna	 believes	 each	 person
should	follow	his	kula	dharma,	which	has	been	predetermined.	Only	then	can
society	be	peaceful,	happy	and	prosperous.	He	is	a	charismatic	leader,	loved	by
many.
Krishna’s	 elder	 brother,	 Balarama,	 is	 the	 supreme	 leader	 of	 the	 Yadavas,	 as
well	as	Prince	Suyodhana’s	Guru.	He	wishes	to	expand	cultivation,	agriculture

and	 establish	 new	 trade	 routes.	 He	 builds	 a	 model	 city,	 Dwaraka,	 on	 the	 west
coast	of	Bharatavarsha.	A	pacifist,	he	is	deeply	fond	of	Suyodhana	and	wishes
him	to	marry	his	sister,	Subhadra	as	the	two	are	in	love.
The	 Yadava	 clan	 has	 migrated	 from	 the	 northern	 plains	 to	 the	 west	 coast	 to
avoid	further	confrontation	with	the	monarch	of	Magadha,	Jarasandha,	a	sworn
enemy	of	the	Yadavas.	He	runs	a	tight	empire	based	on	merit.	The	untouchable
Nishada,	Hiranyadhanus,	Ekalavya’s	alienated	father,	is	the	Commander	of	his
armies.
Meanwhile,	 Karna,	 son	 of	 the	 low-caste	 charioteer,	 Adiratha,	 wishes	 to	 study
archery	 and	 become	 a	 warrior.	 Guru	 Drona	 and	 many	 other	 high-caste
individuals	of	the	court	and	clergy	spurn	him.	However,	Karna	is	determined.
He	travels	on	foot	to	the	South	to	learn	the	warrior ’s	art	under	Parashurama,
the	 supreme	 leader	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate.	 The	 Confederate,	 eyeing	 a
takeover	 of	 Hastinapura,	 views	 Bhishma	 as	 a	 liberal	 who	 is	 negating	 caste
values.	 Karna	 learns	 archery	 from	 Parashurama	 by	 posing	 as	 a	 Brahmin.	 He
gains	 the	 supreme	 accolade	 of	 becoming	 the	 Dharmaveera	 but	 narrowly
escapes	 with	 his	 life	 when	 his	 secret	 is	 blown,	 leaving	 Guru	 Parashurama
prostrate	and	unconscious	with	shock.
Karna	 arrives	 in	 Hastinapura	 on	 the	 day	 the	 Kuru	 princes	 are	 set	 to	 display
their	prowess	in	arms.	He	enters	the	arena	and	outdoes	Arjuna	in	every	feat	of
archery,	but	is	still	ostracised	by	Drona	and	the	other	Brahmins	because	of	his
low	caste.	Prince	Suyodhana	steps	in.	Defying	orthodoxy,	he	elevates	Karna	to
become	King	of	Anga	on	the	spot,	thereby	earning	the	wrath	of	the	Brahmins
and	Karna’s	lifelong	friendship	and	loyalty.
Suyodhana	 pays	 the	 price	 for	 his	 rash	 act	 when	 Subhadra	 rejects	 him	 and
elopes	 with	 Arjuna,	 persuaded	 and	 aided	 by	 Krishna,	 leaving	 him	 devastated
and	deepening	the	enmity	between	him	and	Krishna.
Guru	Drona	demands	that	his	students	defeat	and	drag	to	Hastinapura	in	chains,
his	friend-turned-foe,	King	Drupada	of	Panchala,	as	his	gurudakshina.	Prince
Suyodhana	 and	 his	 friends	 thus	 arrive	 in	 Panchala.	 To	 their	 surprise,	 King
Drupada	 gracefully	 accepts	 his	 wrongdoing	 in	 humiliating	 Drona	 when	 the
latter	 had	 approached	 him	 as	 a	 supplicant.	 In	 Panchala,	 Karna	 meets	 Princess
Draupadi,	 the	 King’s	 beautiful	 daughter,	 and	 they	 fall	 in	 love.	 Suyodhana

returns	 to	 Hastinapura	 bearing	 King	 Drupada’s	 apology	 to	 Drona	 as	 well	 as
gifts	 from	 him.	 But	 the	 Guru	 remains	 adamant.	 He	 orders	 his	 favourite
disciple,	 Prince	 Arjuna,	 to	 defeat	 Drupada.	 Arjuna’s	 men	 descend	 on	 an
unsuspecting	Panchala	and	wreak	havoc.	King	Drupada	and	his	sons,	Shikandi
and	Dhristadyumna,	are	dragged	to	Hastinapura	in	chains.	Bhishma	intervenes
to	 free	 them,	 but	 Dhristadyumna	 believes	 that	 Suyodhana	 cheated	 them	 by
offering	peace	and	then	sending	his	cousins	to	destroy	Panchala.	He	also	warns
Aswathama	that	one	day	he	will	murder	Drona.
To	avoid	further	family	friction,	Bhishma	asks	Kunti	and	her	sons	to	move	to
Varanavata,	 where	 a	 new	 palace	 is	 built	 to	 house	 them.	 Shakuni	 bribes
Purochana,	the	officer-in-charge	of	the	 project,	to	use	inflammable	materials
in	 the	 construction.	 Shakuni	 leaks	 this	 secret	 to	 Kunti	 through	 a	 spy.	 The
Pandavas	 thus	 believe	 that	 Suyodhana	 has	 conspired	 to	 kill	 them.	 Kunti
determines	 to	 outwit	 Suyodhana	 and	 entices	 a	 Nishada	 woman	 and	 her	 five
children	into	the	palace,	which	is	then	set	on	fire.	The	Pandavas	escape	but	the
rumour	spreads	like	wildfire	that	Kunti	and	her	five	sons	have	perished	in	the
fire.	The	Nishada	woman	and	her	sons	who	are	the	true	victims	of	the	fire,	are
related	 to	 Ekalavya,	 causing	 him	 to	 vow	 revenge.	 Ekalavya	 believes	 that
Krishna	is	the	reason	for	all	his	miseries.
On	the	day	of	Princess	Draupadi’s	swayamvara,	Karna	is	insulted	once	again
for	his	caste	when	Krishna	persuades	Draupadi	to	reject	him,	even	though	he
has	 won	 her	 fairly	 in	 the	 competition	 held	 for	 the	 suitors.	 Draupadi	 marries
Arjuna	instead.	However,	Kunti	decides,	in	interests	of	family	unity,	that	all	the
Pandavas	will	share	Draupadi.	Thus	Draupadi	becomes	the	common	wife	of	all
five	brothers,	and	Yudhishtra,	as	the	eldest,	gains	the	first	right	to	live	with	her
for	a	year,	followed	by	the	others,	in	order	of	seniority.
To	 avoid	 any	 clash	 among	 the	 brothers	 over	 the	 beautiful	 Draupadi,	 Krishna
persuades	 Bhima	 and	 Arjuna	 to	 travel	 to	 Magadha	 with	 him.	 In	 a	 duel	 that
follows,	 Bhima	 kills	 Jarasandha	 and	 his	 general	 Hiranyadhanus,	 Ekalavya’s
father.
Meanwhile,	Suyodhana	marries	Princess	Bhanumati,	daughter	of	Chitrangada,
King	 of	 Kalinga,	 and	 sires	 a	 son	 and	 daughter	 –	 Lakshmana	 Kumara	 and
Lakshmana.	 Karna	 too,	 marries	 Vrishali,	 a	 charioteer ’s	 daughter.	 Arjuna	 and
Subhadra	 have	 a	 son,	 Abhimanyu,	 who	 grows	 up	 to	 be	 close	 to	 his	 uncle,

Suyodhana.
To	avoid	war,	Bhishma	persuades	King	Dhritarashtra	to	hand	over	the	forests
of	Khandivaprastha	to	the	Pandavas,	where	they	can	build	a	new	city.	Krishna
advises	Arjuna	to	burn	the	forest	and	purge	every	living	thing	in	it	in	order	to
enable	a	new	city	to	be	built	there	to	rival	Hastinapura.	Arjuna	and	his	soldiers
kill	 thousands	 of	 Naga	 men	 and	 women	 but	 spare	 the	 life	 of	 the	 young
architect,	Mayasura,	who	bargains	for	the	life	of	a	few	women	and	his	foster
father	–	Indra,	the	fallen	Deva	King.	Maya	builds	a	splendid	palace	and	city	but
is	 then	 banished	 from	 his	 creation,	 being	 an	 untouchable.	 Indra,	 Arjuna’s
biological	father,	refuses	his	son’s	offer	to	live	in	the	palace	and	follows	Maya
into	exile.	However,	Indra	decides	to	build	a	deadly	new	weapon	with	Maya’s
help,	to	gift	to	his	son.	He	believes	that	without	it,	his	son	is	doomed.
The	 Nagas	 are	 incensed	 by	 the	 pogrom	 that	 killed	 their	 people.	 Shakuni	 fans
the	 flame	 of	 hatred.	 Ekalavya	 is	 welcomed	 by	 Krishna’s	 foes,	 such	 as
Shishupala	and	Shalva,	and	they	decide	to	capture	Krishna	during	the	Rajasuya
sacrifice	 being	 done	 by	 Yudhishtra	 to	 inaugurate	 his	 new	 palace.	 Suyodhana
too,	receives	Yudhishtra’s	invitation	to	attend	the	Rajasuya.
At	the	Rajasuya,	Shishupala	defies	the	Brahmins	by	seating	Ekalavya	near	the
holy	fire.	But	when	the	Pandavas	elect	Krishna	as	their	honoured	guest	for	the
Rajasuya,	 Shishupala	 stands	 up	 to	 accuse	 Krishna	 of	 many	 wrongdoings.
Krishna	 kills	 Shishupala	 on	 the	 spot.	 In	 the	 tussle	 that	 follows,	 Ekalavya
escapes.	 He	 and	 Shalva	 rush	 to	 Dwaraka	 with	 their	 army,	 intent	 on	 pounding
Krishna’s	city	to	dust.	Krishna	is	forced	to	leave	the	Rajasuya	to	save	his	city.
Unknown	 to	 him,	 Takshaka	 and	 his	 army	 of	 Nagas,	 have	 planned	 to	 ambush
him	on	the	way	to	Dwaraka.
Suyodhana	reaches	the	Indraprastha	palace	angered	by	the	treatment	meted	out
to	 Mayasura	 and	 the	 other	 common	 folk	 of	 low	 caste.	 In	 the	 course	 of	 an
argument	 with	 the	 Pandavas,	 he	 accidentally	 falls	 into	 a	 fountain.	 The	 entire
Sabha	 bursts	 into	 laughter	 and	 Draupadi	 mocks	 his	 soaked	 nakedness.
Suyodhana	vows	revenge	for	the	insult	and	storms	back	to	Hastinapura.
Unknown	 to	 them,	 Parashurama,	 the	 Supreme	 Leader	 of	 the	 Southern
Confederate,	has	recovered	from	his	coma	and	the	southern	armies	are	on	the
move	towards	Hastinapura	to	capture	Karna.

Shakuni	 moves	 his	 pieces	 carefully.	 He	 persuades	 Suyodhana	 that	 defeating
Yudhishtra	in	a	game	of	dice	is	an	easier	way	to	take	revenge	than	to	fight	him.
At	Suyodhana’s	invitation,	Yudhishtra	arrives	in	Hastinapura	for	the	game.	One
by	 one,	 Yudhishtra	 pledges	 his	 possessions,	 city-state,	 brothers,	 and	 even	 his
wife,	 against	 the	 wily	 Gandharan,	 and	 loses	 them	 all.	 Suyodhana	 orders	 his
brother	Sushasana	to	bring	Draupadi,	who	dared	to	mock	and	humiliate	him,	to
the	Sabha	–	to	be	stripped	like	a	whore	before	all.
The	story	continues…

1			SHAME
	
DRAUPADI	KNEW	HE	WOULD	BE	BACK.	She	had	merely	bought	time	by	cowing	the

messenger	 sent	 to	 fetch	 her	 with	 an	 imperious	 glare.	 She	 had	 sent	 him	 back
with	a	question	for	the	elders	in	the	Sabha:	Had	her	husband	pawned	her	before
he	himself	had	become	a	slave	or	after?	A	slave	belonged	to	his	master,	he	had
no	 rights,	 no	 possessions	 and	 could	 not	 have	 staked	 her.	 The	 messenger	 had
bowed	 in	 confusion	 and	 rushed	 back	 to	 convey	 her	 words.	 The	 door	 had
slammed	 shut	 but	 the	 enormity	 of	 what	 Yudhishtra	 had	 done	 began	 to
overwhelm	Draupadi’s	mind.	She	could	sense	the	stunned	silence	in	the	Sabha
when	her	question	was	repeated.
Draupadi	 forgot	 to	 breathe	 when	 she	 heard	 heavy	 footsteps	 hurrying	 up	 the
stairs.	They	were	coming	for	her.	Her	words	had	not	deterred	them.	She	stood
with	 her	 back	 to	 the	 wall,	 her	 heart	 thudding	 in	 her	 chest	 as	 fear	 crept
insidiously	up	her	body	from	her	toes.	She	desperately	clutched	the	single	sari
that	 custom	dictated	 women	don	during	menstruation.	As	the	other	women	in
the	 chamber	 watched	 in	 aghast	 silence,	 the	 door	 was	 kicked	 open.	 Prince
Sushasana	stood	with	his	feet	planted	on	either	side	of	the	threshold,	a	lopsided
grin	 on	 his	 flushed	 face.	 He	 rushed	 towards	 Draupadi	 but	 Subhadra	 threw
herself	between	them.	Sushasana	roughly	shoved	Subhadra	away	and	grabbed
Draupadi	by	her	long,	lustrous	hair	and	pulled	viciously.	She	fell	to	her	knees
in	pain.
‘Why	 is	 he	 doing	 this	 to	 me?	 Where	 are	 my	 husbands?’	 Frantic	 thoughts
flooded	Draupadi’s	mind.	She	could	bear	the	pain	but	not	the	shame.	She	clung
to	 the	 bedpost,	 the	 door,	 the	 handrails	 –	 anything	 that	 would	 stop	 Sushasana
from	dragging	her	half-clad	to	the	Sabha.	But	she	was	no	match	for	the	burly
Kaurava,	drunk	with	soma	and	lust.	The	women	of	the	royal	household	watched
the	 brutish	 display	 in	 wide-eyed	 horror.	 Not	 a	 word	 was	 uttered;	 the	 only
sounds	 were	 Draupadi’s	 pitiful	 appeals	 to	 the	 Prince	 and	 his	 loud	 laughter
echoing	down	the	stairway...

Murmurs	ran	across	the	Sabha	like	a	wind	though	a	field	of	wheat.	Every	eye
was	on	Sushasana	and	the	woman	he	was	dragging	into	the	marbled	hall,	one
hand	 at	 her	 breast,	 the	 other	 grasping	 at	 anything	 that	 could	 stop	 her	 being
dragged	 away.	 The	 bruises	 on	 her	 arms	 and	 face	 marked	 her	 torturous	 and
resisting	journey.	She	sensed	the	men	staring	at	her	but	did	not	raise	her	head.
She	 noticed	 every	 petal	 and	 frond	 of	 the	 design	 inlaid	 into	 the	 marble	 at	 her
feet.	 She	 could	 smell	 the	 incense	 in	 the	 air	 and	 the	 odours	 of	 the	 crowded
Sabha.	 She	 could	 feel	 the	 lustful	 gaze	 of	 hundreds	 of	 men	 on	 her	 bowed,
scantily-clad	form.	She	could	sense	their	thoughts.
Suddenly,	raucous	laughter	echoed	around	the	vast	hall.	Unbidden,	her	father ’s
parting	 words	 rose	 to	 Draupadi’s	 mind:	 ‘Whatever	 the	 destinies	 may	 have	 in
store,	my	daughter,	always	remember	that	you	are	of	royal	blood,	the	daughter
of	a	King,	a	Princess.	Act	in	accordance	with	that	knowledge,	which	no	one	can
take	from	you.’	Unable	to	bear	the	thought	of	her	proud	father	hearing	of	her
humiliation,	 Draupadi	 raised	 her	 head	 defiantly.	 Karna’s	 blazing	 eyes	 stared
back	at	her,	contempt	and	pity	mingled	in	their	glowing	depths,	his	fine	lips	set
in	silent	condemnation.
Sushasana	 pulled	 Draupadi	 forward	 by	 one	 arm.	 Trembling	 with	 anger	 and
fear,	she	clutched	at	the	flimsy	sari	covering	her	breasts.
“This	 is	 ignoble!	 This	 is	 no	 way	 to	 treat	 a	 woman!	 Cousin	 Yudhishtra	 is	 my
brother	Suyodhana’s	slave.	How	can	a	slave	stake	anything?”	The	lone	voice	of
Prince	 Vikarna,	 Suyodhana’s	 young	 brother,	 rang	 out,	 extinguishing	 the
laughter	and	chatter.	There	was	pindrop	silence	in	the	Sabha.	Draupadi	closed
her	eyes	in	relief.	Someone	to	protect	her	at	last.
“Prince	 Vikarna,	 this	 is	 a	 matter	 between	 a	 master	 and	 his	 slave.	 It	 does	 not
concern	 anyone	 else.”	 Karna	 was	 standing	 up,	 pointing	 a	 finger	 at	 the	 young
Kuru	prince.
Draupadi	felt	breathless	as	she	waited	for	her	lone	supporter	to	answer.	But	all
she	heard	was	defeated	silence.	It	was	the	law.
Finally,	Vidhura	pleaded	in	a	soft	voice,	“She	is	a	Kuru	wife	and	daughter-inlaw...”

“Sir,	 you	 are	 a	 scholar.	 Is	 it	 for	 me	 to	 remind	 you	 that	 our	 laws	 consider	 a
woman	who	shares	the	bed	of	more	than	four	men	a	prostitute?	This	woman
serves	 five	 men.	 She	 was	 pledged	 in	 the	 dice	 game	 by	 her	 husband.	 Prince
Suyodhana	won	her	fairly	with	all	of	us	as	witnesses.	He	is	entitled	to	decide
what	is	to	be	done	with	her.”
‘Karna,	how	can	you	be	a	party	to	this?	How	can	you	do	this	to	me?’	Draupadi
stared	at	Karna,	the	silent	words	beating	in	her	heart	before	she	hissed	at	him,
“Enough,	you	Suta!”
Before	Karna	could	retort	she	turned	towards	her	husbands,	standing	beside	the
dais	where	 the	fateful	game	had	been	played	out.	“Am	I	your	chattel	 to	pawn
when	you	wish,	share	when	you	want,	and	sell	when	you	fancy?”	She	looked	at
Yudhishtra’s	 stooped	 shoulders,	 trembling	 fingers	 and	 bent	 head	 with
contempt.	 “Speak!	 Do	 something!	 Can	 you	 not	 see	 what	 is	 happening?	 How
could	you	pledge	me	when	you	were	already	a	slave?”
When	 the	 erstwhile	 Prince	 of	 Indraprastha,	 considered	 a	 font	 of	 knowledge,
remained	 mute	 with	 his	 eyes	 downcast,	 Draupadi	 closed	 her	 own	 eyes	 in
despair.	Was	this	the	same	man	who	had	braved	his	warrior-brother ’s	wrath	to
share	her?
Jayadratha,	King	of	Sind,	his	eyes	flickering	over	Draupadi’s	slim	form	gave	a
mirthless	 laugh	 and	 said,	 “They	 are	 slaves	 now,	 lady.	 They	 cannot	 speak
without	permission	from	their	master.”	Shakuni	chuckled	in	glee.
“Arjuna,	do	you	not	hear	these	taunts?”	Draupadi	whispered.	But	all	five	of	her
warrior	 husbands	 remained	 silent,	 their	 eyes	 fixed	 to	 the	 floor.	 “Are	 you
Kshatriyas?	 Are	 you	 even	 men?”	 Draupadi’s	 chest	 heaved	 in	 agitation	 as
laughter	resounded	round	the	Sabha.
“Draupadi,	be	patient,	they	are	consulting	the	holy	books,”	Jayadratha	said	to
fresh	roars	of	laughter.
Draupadi	dropped	to	her	knees	and	covered	her	flaming	face	with	her	hands.
No,	 she	 would	 not	 weep	 because	 her	 five	 brave	 husbands	 had	 forsaken	 her
when	 she	 needed	 them	 the	 most.	 She	 was	 still	 the	 daughter	 of	 a	 King.	 She
looked	 up	 at	 Suyodhana	 and	 asked	 in	 bewilderment,	 her	 throat	 burning,

“Prince,	why	are	you	doing	this?”
“Did	 you	 really	 think	 you	 would	 go	 unpunished	 after	 insulting	 me?	 Did	 you
think	you	could	get	away	with	abusing	a	man	like	Karna?	You	are	a	slave	now
and	 must	 do	 as	 you	 are	 told,	 like	 your	 valorous	 husbands	 over	 there,”
Suyodhana	 snapped,	 his	 eyes	 blazing.	 He	 slapped	 his	 thigh	 and	 commanded,
“Come	 and	 sit	 here,	 Draupadi	 or	 you	 will	 be	 stripped	 naked	 in	 front	 of	 the
entire	Sabha.”
The	laughter	ceased.	An	uneasy	silence	reigned.
Shakuni	leaned	forward	and	spoke.	“Perhaps	Devi	Draupadi	is	ignorant	of	the
law	of	karma.	 She	 should	 seek	 instruction	 from	 her	 first	 husband.	 For	 every
action	there	will	be	a...”
“Shut	 up,	 you	 Mlecha!”	 Draupadi	 yelled	 in	 fury.	 But	 Shakuni	 merely	 grinned
and	ran	his	fingers	through	his	greying	beard.
“Pitamaha...”	 Draupadi’s	 lips	 trembled	 as	 she	 turned	 to	 the	 Grand	 Regent.
Bhishma	sat	rigid,	his	gaze	fixed	on	an	invisible	spot	on	the	ceiling.
Draupadi	 turned	 to	 the	 King,	 her	 hands	 joined	 in	 supplication.	 “I	 am	 your
daughter-in-law,	Sire.”
Dhritarashtra	turned	to	his	scribe	and	asked	in	a	low	whisper,	“Sanjaya,	where
is	Gandhari?”
“Acharya	 Drona...”	 Draupadi	 pleaded,	 turning	 to	 the	 Guru,	 who	 looked	 in
embarrassment	at	Dhaumya	for	support.
“Guru	 Dhaumya...”	 Draupadi	 cried.	 The	 High	 Priest	 vanished	 behind	 a	 group
of	clergy.
“Acharya	 Kripa?”	 Draupadi	 asked	 with	 a	 sinking	 heart,	 hoping	 the	 maverick
would	do	something	to	save	her.	He	had	championed	the	most	unlikely	people
in	the	past.
An	 ironic	 laugh	 was	 his	 answer	 as	 got	 up	 to	 walk	 out.	 She	 gazed	 at	 him
incredulously	as	he	stopped	in	front	of	her.	“Daughter,	it	is	for	you	to	ask	your

husband	 why	 he	 gambled	 you	 away.	 Ask	 the	 gamblers	 on	 both	 sides	 whether
they	realised	they	were	gambling	with	destiny.”
“Devi	 Draupadi,	 may	 we	 get	 on	 with	 the	 business	 at	 hand	 without	 further
delay?”	Shakuni’s	words	got	a	few	laughs	from	some	of	the	Kaurava	princes.
“Prince	Sushasana,	what	are	you	waiting	for?	Strip	her!”	he	ordered,	caressing
the	dice	between	his	palms.
Draupadi	 shrieked	 and	 turned	 to	 run,	 but	 Sushasana	 quickly	 grabbed	 hold	 of
the	end	of	her	sari.	Her	five	husbands	stood	staring	at	their	hands,	not	looking
at	her	–	puppets	controlled	by	priests	and	obscure	texts.	‘Krishna!	You	were	the
one	who	told	me	to	marry	these	cowards.’	With	anger	scathing	her	heart,	she
cried	aloud,	“Krishna...	Krishna...”
Sushasana	tugged	hard	at	Draupadi’s	sari	while	she	struggled	to	preserve	her
modesty.	 Finally,	drunk	and	bemused,	he	tripped	over	 the	unending	cloth	and
fell.	 Draupadi	 crouched	 on	 the	 floor,	 her	 head	 on	 her	 knees,	 yards	 of	 sari
spread	around	her,	unable	to	face	the	Sabha.	Oh,	shame!	Was	there	not	a	man	in
this	 Sabha	 who	 would	 raise	 his	 voice	 in	 protest	 of	 this	 atrocity	 against	 a
woman?
As	 if	 reminded	 by	 some	 higher	 powers,	 murmurs	 rose	 in	 the	 assembly,
condemning	 Suyodhana	 and	 his	 loyalists.	 When	 the	 great	 priests	 and	 noble
Kshatriyas	remained	silent,	Vidhura	moved	to	the	centre	of	the	Sabha	and	stood
near	Draupadi.	For	the	first	time	in	his	life,	the	son	of	a	dasi	stood	before	the
Kshatriyas	and	pious	priests	with	his	head	raised	high	and	addressed	them	in	a
contemptuous	voice,	“A	question	has	been	raised	in	this	Sabha	of	noble	men,
by	 a	 helpless	 woman,	 about	 dharma,	 and	 all	 you	 answer	 her	 with	 is	 your
silence?”	His	eyes	blazing,	Vidhura	turned	to	his	master,	Lord	Bhishma.	“Sir,
Prince	Vikarna	tried	to	answer	Draupadi’s	question	with	whatever	knowledge
he	 has.	 You	 are	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 of	 the	 Kurus,	 the	 most	 noble	 of	 the
Kshatriyas,	why	do	you	then	remain	silent	in	the	face	of	adharma?	Answer	this
daughter-in-law	of	the	Kurus.	How	could	he	pawn	what	he	did	not	own	in	the
first	place?”
Bhishma	 glared	 at	 his	 longtime	 and	 loyal	 aide,	 who	 had	 put	 him	 in	 such	 a
difficult	position	now.	All	eyes	were	on	him.	He	cleared	his	throat	and	said	in	a
voice	devoid	of	its	usual	commanding	timbre,	“I	am	unclear	about	this	point	of

dharma.	It	is	true	that	Yudhishtra	had	already	become	a	slave	when	he	pawned
his	wife,	but	some	Shastras	say	a	wife	is	the	property	of	her	husband,	so	when
he	 becomes	 a	 slave,	 she	 too	 is	 a	 slave.	 I	 leave	 it	 to	 the	 King’s	 wisdom	 to
decide.”
Karna	 sprang	 up	 from	 his	 seat.	 “Suyodhana!	 These	 three	 men,	 Vidhura
Mahasaya,	Bhishma	Pitamaha	and	Guru	Drona,	will	always	side	with	the	sons
of	 Pandu.	 You	 have	 all	 the	 rights	 here	 to	 do	 whatever	 we	 please	 with	 these
slaves.”
A	 sudden	 tussle	 broke	 out	 among	 Pandavas.	 The	 normally	 silent	 Bhima
shouted	at	Arjuna,	who	was	trying	to	restrain	him,	“Let	me	go	Arjuna,	unhand
me!	Bring	me	some	embers	of	fire	and	let	me	burn	Yudhishtra’s	hands	which
itch	to	gamble.	How	dare	he	make	the	purest	of	all	women	suffer	like	this?	It	is
not	Duryodhana	who	has	brought	misery	upon	us	but	he	who	always	speaks	of
dharma.”
At	these	impassioned	words	Suyodhana	and	his	friends	burst	into	laughter.	The
man	who	was	considered	the	epitome	of	dharma	was	exposed	for	what	he	was,
thought	Suyodhana.	Yudhishtra	continued	to	stand	with	his	head	bowed.
Vidhura	turned	to	the	Crown	Prince,	his	face	flushed	with	anger.	“Suyodhana,
are	you	not	ashamed	of	what	is	happening	here?	You	are	the	man	who	speaks
of	noble	conduct	and	the	blood	of	the	great	Bharata	flowing	in	your	veins.	Yet
now	you	behave	like	a	boor.	Where	are	your	principles	and	famed	generosity
of	heart	now?”
Suyodhana	winced	at	his	uncle’s	words.	He	had	never	thought	things	would	go
this	far.	He	had	won	his	cousin’s	kingdom	and	reduced	the	Pandavas	to	slavery.
He	could	afford	to	be	generous.	But	when	he	looked	at	his	cousin	Yudhishtra,
standing	 before	 him,	 resentment	 rose	 in	 him	 like	 bile.	 When	 he	 had	 been
shamed	 in	 Yudhishtra’s	 Sabha,	 there	 had	 been	 neither	 Vidhura	 nor	 the	 other
learned	 men	 to	 support	 him.	 There	 had	 been	 no	 debate	 about	 dharma	 and
adharma.	Shaking	away	Shakuni’s	restraining	hand,	Suyodhana	stood	up.
“Draupadi,	I	see	 your	point.	Yudhishtra	had	no	right	to	pledge	you	as	 he	had
already	become	my	slave.	Neither	had	he	any	right	to	pledge	his	brothers.	Let
him	say	aloud	in	the	Sabha	of	the	Kurus	that	it	was	adharma	to	pledge	you	and

his	brothers.	Let	him	say	that	he	uttered	a	lie	when	he	gleefully	pledged	all	of
you	when	he	did	not	own	you.	Let	him	say	he	did	it	in	the	hope	of	winning	what
he	does	not	deserve	–	the	inheritance	of	Hastinapura	–	from	me.	And	all	of	you
shall	denounce	him	and	declare	you	do	not	belong	to	him.	I	shall	then	restore
all	 he	 has	 lost	 and	 even	 consider	 giving	 my	 cousin	 Indraprastha	 back,	 as	 a
vassal	 state.	 This	 is	 the	 promise	 of	 a	 Kshatriya.	 Speak!	 You	 can	 regain
everything	you	have	lost.”
There	 was	 an	 embarrassed	 silence	 in	 the	 Sabha.	 Even	 Bhima,	 who	 had	 been
agitated	 a	 few	 moments	 before,	 remained	 silent.	 Suyodhana’s	 generous	 offer
put	 Yudhishtra	 in	 a	 fix.	 His	 four	 brothers	 looked	 at	 him.	 Draupadi’s	 eyes
glowed	 like	 jewels	 in	 her	 face.	 Surely	 if	 there	 was	 one	 man	 who	 had	 the
humility	to	admit	a	grievous	fault,	that	one	was	Yudhishtra?
“Tell	 him	 you	 were	 wrong,	 brother.	 Once	 we	 have	 Indraprastha	 back	 we	 can
declare	war	against	evil	Duryodhana	and	punish	him	for	what	he	has	done	to
Draupadi,”	Bhima	hissed	into	his	brother ’s	ear.
But	Yudhishtra	shook	his	head.	He	was	a	gambler	who	longed	to	win	the	throne
of	Hastinapura,	but	he	would	not	go	back	on	his	word.	“My	brothers	and	my
wife	 will	 not	 deny	 that,	 as	 eldest,	 I	 have	 the	 right	 to	 decide	 for	 us	 all.	 I
committed	no	adharma,	nor	do	I	question	destiny.	If	it	is	my	destiny	to	suffer	at
the	 hands	 of	 my	 cousin’s	 injustice,	 I	 shall	 do	 so	 with	 dignity,	 as	 will	 my
brothers	and	wife.”	Yudhishtra’s	voice	was	quiet	but	firm.	An	animal	cry	rose
from	Bhima’s	throat.	Draupadi’s	shoulders	drooped	in	despair.
“Duryodhana,	 you	 are	 trapping	 my	 brother	 with	 vile	 words	 and	 low	 tricks.
Come	and	fight	me	like	a	man,”	Bhima	shouted.
“Loud	words,	Bhima,”	Shakuni	intervened.	“As	loud	as	an	empty	drum	and	as
hollow.	Masters	do	not	fight	slaves.	Ask	your	brother.”
“I	 beg	 the	 forgiveness	 of	 the	 Sabha	 for	 my	 brother ’s	 outburst,”	 Yudhishtra
said,	ignoring	the	burning	condemnation	in	Bhima’s	eyes.
There	 was	 a	 stir	 at	 the	 door	 and	 Gandhari	 stormed	 into	 the	 Sabha	 with
Subhadra	 and	 Bhanumati	 hurrying	 behind	 her.	 The	 Queen	 found	 her	 way	 to
Suyodhana	 and	 touched	 his	 face	 to	 ensure	 it	 was	 indeed	 her	 eldest	 son.	 He

attempted	 to	 rise	 but	 before	 he	 could	 do	 so,	 his	 mother	 slapped	 him	 hard
across	his	astonished	face,	leaving	her	palm	print	emblazoned	on	his	cheek.
There	 was	 a	 collective	 gasp	 in	 the	 Sabha	 and	 then	 utter	 silence.	 Bhanumati
rushed	to	Draupadi,	trying	to	cover	her,	but	she	pushed	her	back	angrily.
Turning	to	where	Sushasana	lay	in	a	drunken	stupor,	Draupadi	kicked	him	with
her	bare	foot.	He	did	not	stir.	Clutching	her	dishevelled	hair,	she	said	in	a	voice
that	shook	with	emotion,	“Each	one	of	you	hear	me	now...I	will	not	tie	my	hair,
touched	by	this	swine	at	my	feet,	until	my	husbands	are	men	enough	to	kill	him.
Then	I	will	wash	my	hair	with	the	blood	of	those	four	evil	men	–	Duryodhana,
Dushasana,	Karna	and	Jayadratha.”
Bhima	took	a	step	forward.	“I	will	kill	them	for	you,	Draupadi.”	She	snorted
and	flicked	her	hands	as	if	he	was	an	annoying	fly.
“I	am	ashamed.”	Gandhari’s	voice	silenced	the	Sabha	which	had	begun	to	hum
with	voices.	 “Where	were	the	Acharyas	and	Gurus	when	a	woman	was	being
humiliated	in	our	own	Sabha?”
Draupadi	glared	at	the	courtiers,	refusing	to	cry,	refusing	to	be	pitied.	She	was
a	Princess;	she	would	not	bow	her	head.	She	had	done	no	wrong.	The	roomful
of	 warriors,	 nobles,	 courtiers	 and	 high-caste	 clergy,	 stood	 with	 their	 heads
bent.	 The	 silence	 damned	 them	 all.	 The	 Grand	 Regent	 sat	 as	 if	 carved	 from
stone.
Gandhari	turned	towards	her	sightless	husband.	“Perhaps	arrogance	and	pride
made	them	blind,	but	you,	my	Lord,	our	King?	Draupadi	is	but	a	woman.	She
begged	for	your	mercy.	Why	were	you	silent?”
Vidhura	walked	up	to	the	Queen	and	guided	her	to	a	chair	beside	Dhritarashtra.
When	 she	 touched	 his	 arm,	 the	 King’s	 eyes	 shone	 with	 unshed	 tears.	 There
were	no	words.	He	had	done	an	ignoble	thing.	He	had	tarnished	the	crown	he
wore.
A	 haunting	 howl	 rose	 from	 the	 palace	 gardens.	 The	 courtiers	 looked	 at	 each
other,	 some	 in	 fear,	 many	 in	 confusion.	 Gandhari	 turned	 to	 her	 husband.
“Prabhu,	our	son	has	shamed	us	by	his	ignoble	actions.	Do	you	not	hear	the	ill

omens?	Jackals	have	dared	come	near	the	palace	in	 broad	daylight.	 They	are
the	harbingers	of	a	dark	future.	I	see	war	and	death.	The	Kuru	dynasty	is	cursed
with	the	tears	of	its	women,	and	now	we	have	added	Draupadi’s	name	to	that
inglorious	list.	My	Lord,	I	know	you	will	be	just	and	follow	dharma.”
The	King	felt	bitter	and	angry	at	his	Queen’s	words.	His	son	had	won	the	game
of	dice	fair	and	square.	Suyodhana	had	even	offered	them	their	kingdom	back.
All	his	brother ’s	high-principled	son	had	to	do	was	admit	he	had	acted	against
dharma	in	pledging	his	wife	and	brothers;	but	he	refused	to	do	so.	No	one	had
forced	 him	 into	 the	 game.	 And	 now	 he,	 Dhritarashtra,	 was	 being	 blamed	 for
permitting	 it	 to	 happen	 in	 the	 Sabha.	 Where	 had	 the	 priests,	 who	 were	 ever
eager	 with	 unwanted	 advice,	 gone?	 Everyone	 remained	 silent	 and	 he	 was	 to
take	 the	 blame.	 Even	 his	 son	 was	 acting	 mighty	 and	 generous	 after	 shaming
him	 and	 making	 him	 look	 a	 fool	 –	 a	 blind,	 good-for-nothing	 fool.	 No,	 the
Dhritarashtra	 who	 had	 fought	 elephants	 bare-handed	 and	 could	 crush	 rocks
with	his	palms,	was	second	to	none	when	it	came	to	nobility	and	generosity.	He
was	 the	 greatest	 Kshatriya	 and	 would	 be	 generous	 to	 the	 sons	 of	 his	 cursed
brother,	 Pandu,	 who	 had	 taken	 the	 throne	 citing	 his	 blindness.	 Dhritarashtra
would	shame	his	dead	brother ’s	soul	with	his	generosity	and	greatness.
The	murmuring	which	had	begun	in	the	hall	subsided	as	the	King	stood	up	and
said	 in	 a	 voice	 hoarse	 with	 emotion,	 “Something	 has	 taken	 place	 here	 which
should	never	have	happened.	Draupadi,	my	daughter,	no	words	of	remorse	can
undo	what	was	done	to	you.	Yet	I	ask	you	to	find	it	in	your	heart	to	forgive	us
all.”
Suyodhana	sat	stunned	by	the	turn	of	events.	He	was	proud	of	the	ethical	stand
he	 had	 always	 taken,	 often	 going	 against	 the	 established	 norms.	 No	 longer
could	 he	 claim	 the	 moral	 high	 ground.	 He	 had	 committed	 a	 grave	 error	 of
judgment.	 But	 as	 he	 listened	 to	 his	 father,	 he	 felt	 anger	 stir	 within	 him	 like	 a
hooded	cobra.
“Daughter,	you	may	ask	me	for	three	boons	and	as	King	of	the	Bharata	clan,	I
promise	to	bestow	whatever	you	seek.	Ask.	Allow	a	blind	man	to	try	and	right
the	wrong	that	has	been	done	to	you.”
Draupadi	 looked	 up	 in	 surprise	 when	 she	 heard	 the	 King’s	 words.	 Shakuni’s
fingers	 wrapped	 around	 the	 dice,	 his	 knuckles	 turning	 white.	 His	 sister	 had

spoilt	everything.	Now	that	fool	Dhritarashtra	would	act	high	and	mighty	and
undo	 the	 good	 work	 he	 had	 done.	 But	 when	 he	 looked	 at	 Suyodhana’s	 stern
face,	his	smile	returned.	He	could	work	this	out.	He	would	wait.
“Oh	 King,	 the	 greatest	 of	 all	 Kurus!”	 Draupadi	 exclaimed	 with	 folded	 hands.
Dhritarashtra’s	lips	broke	into	a	satisfied	smile.	“Free	my	husbands	from	your
son’s	slavery.”
“Daughter,	your	wish	is	granted,”	Dhritarashtra	said.	There	were	murmurs	of
approval	 from	 the	 Sabha.	 They	 would	 be	 singing	 his	 praises	 in	 the	 streets	 of
Hastinapura.	His	fame	would	travel	far	and	wide	and	history	would	judge	him
as	the	greatest	of	all	Kings.
“Restore	 my	 husbands’	 kingdom	 and	 all	 that	 we	 have	 lost,”	 Draupadi	 said,
eyeing	her	husband	with	contempt.	Yudhishtra	looked	up	and	gazed	at	his	wife
in	amazement.
“I	restore	to	the	Pandavas	all	they	lost	in	the	game.	I	also	give	to	my	nephew,
Yudhishtra,	half	my	kingdom,	to	rule	independently.”
Murmurs	 of	 approbation	 rose	 on	 all	 sides	 as	 Dhritarashtra	 sat	 down.
Yudhishtra’s	face	lightened.	Suyodhana’s	eyes	burned	with	fury.	How	could	his
father	 give	 back	 Indraprastha	 to	 the	 Pandavas?	 The	 kingdom,	 the	 wealth,	 the
power,	it	was	all	his	by	right.	How	could	some	bastards	take	it	away?
“The	 Pandavas	 receive	 their	 kingdom	 from	 the	 hands	 of	 a	 woman	 and	 they
dare	to	call	themselves	Kshatriyas?	Devi	Draupadi,	you	are	more	than	equal	to
all	five	of	them	put	together,”	Karna	said,	his	eyes	mocking	the	men	who	had
always	insulted	him	for	his	caste.
Arjuna	sprang	up	in	a	fury.	“Suta!	I	am	no	longer	a	slave.	Come	forward	and
fight	me	like	a	man.”
“Why	would	I	fight	you,	Arjuna?	If	you	lose,	you	will	go	to	your	wife,	who
will	beg	the	King	to	rescue	you.”
Yudhishtra	restrained	Arjuna,	holding	onto	 his	wrist.	Before	things	could	get
uglier,	 Bhishma	 rose	 and	 all	 eyes	 turned	 to	 him.	 “The	 Sabha	 is	 closed.	 Let
arrangements	be	made	for	King	Yudhishtra	to	travel	to	Indraprastha.”

Shakuni	panicked.	He	had	been	on	the	verge	of	success	when	his	sister	arrived
and	 destroyed	 everything.	 Something	 needed	 to	 be	 done	 quickly.	 Wiping	 all
doubt	 from	 his	 face,	 he	 moved	 to	 Yudhishtra,	 who	 was	 picking	 up	 his
discarded	 clothing.	 “Your	 Highness,	 why	 be	 indebted	 to	 Suyodhana’s	 charity
and	a	woman’s	mercy	like	this?	Would	you	care	to	try	one	more	throw	for	a
chance	to	win	back	everything,	like	a	true	Kshatriya?”
“Shakuni,	 I	 know	 what	 you	 are	 up	 to...”	 Gandhari	 cried	 when	 she	 heard	 her
brother ’s	words.
“Sister,	this	is	the	accepted	protocol	between	dice	players,”	answered	Shakuni
suavely,	 his	 customary	 smile	 back	 on	 his	 face.	 “It	 is	 my	 duty	 to	 give	 my
opponent	 a	 fair	 chance	 to	 win	 back	 his	 losses.	 It	 is	 the	 code	 of	 the	 dice.	 Of
course,	if	the	King	of	Indraprastha	does	not	care	to	take	up	the	challenge,	that
is	another	matter.”
“I	 will	 play.”	 Yudhishtra	 once	 again	 climbed	 onto	 the	 dais,	 still	 laid	 with	 the
dicing	cloth.	Cupping	his	palms,	he	accepted	the	dice	Shakuni	held	out	to	him.
“Some	people	never	learn,”	the	courtiers	whispered	to	each	other.
“What	is	the	wager,	Your	Highness?”	Shakuni	asked	with	elaborate	courtesy.
Before	 Yudhishtra	 could	 answer,	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 stood	 up.	 There	 was
complete	silence.	“The	Princes	Suyodhana	and	Yudhishtra	have	both	chosen	to
prove	before	this	assembly	that	neither	has	attained	the	maturity	or	wisdom	to
rule	a	country.	A	ruler	is	but	the	custodian	of	the	land	he	rules,	he	does	not	own
it.	Similarly,	a	husband	is	an	equal	partner	in	the	marital	relationship;	he	does
not	 own	 his	 wife.	 It	 remains	 their	 shame	 and	 our	 sorrow,	 that	 these	 noble
Princes	of	the	Kuru	clan	have	forgotten	the	tenets	which	mark	civilized	men.”
Lord	 Bhishma	 paused,	 his	 eyes	 fixed	 not	 on	 the	 assembly	 but	 the	 glistening
river	beyond	the	windows.	The	Sabha	waited.
“Since	 my	 grand-nephews	 have	 decided	 to	 gamble	 again,	 despite	 what	 has
happened	today,	I	will	decide	the	wager.	The	person	who	loses	will	surrender
his	kingdom	to	the	winner	and	face	banishment	to	the	forest	for	twelve	years.
In	 the	 thirteenth	 year	 of	 exile,	 the	 loser	 will	 remain	 incognito.	 Should	 the
winner	 find	 him	 during	 that	 period,	 the	 loser	 will	 repeat	 the	 cycle	 of	 twelve

years	in	the	forest	and	one	year	in	hiding.”
There	was	appalled	silence	in	the	Sabha.	Twelve	years	and	another	in	hiding,
hunted	by	one’s	foes?	Was	it	even	possible	to	win	free?
“I	agree	to	the	terms,”	Yudhishtra	said	immediately.
Gasps	 of	 disbelief	 sounded	 through	 the	 assembly	 but	 the	 Pandava	 Prince
merely	looked	straight	at	the	Grand	Regent,	calm	and	assured.	He	was	sure	he
would	 win	 this	 time.	 In	 one	 throw	 he	 would	 regain	 Hastinapura	 and	 banish
Duryodhana	and	his	evil	cronies	forever.
Draupadi	 stood	 frozen.	 What	 was	 Yudhishtra	 doing?	 Could	 he	 not	 see	 her
anguish?	 Had	 she	 not	 suffered	 enough?	 Bhima	 turned	 to	 walk	 out,	 telling
Arjuna	to	inform	him	when	it	was	time	to	go	into	exile.	Arjuna	held	on	to	his
arm,	begging	him	to	stay.
Gripped	 by	 gambling	 fever	 and	 overcome	 by	 his	 public	 humiliation,
Yudhishtra’s	 years	 of	 intellectual	 training	 deserted	 him.	 Touching	 his	 lucky
amulet,	 he	 mumbled,	 “This	 time	 the	 charm	 will	 protect	 me.	 I	 have	 always
followed	dharma.	Dharma	 will	 protect	 me	 from	 evil.	 Trust	 me,	 my	 brothers,
our	 luck	 will	 turn.	 We	 will	 all	 witness	 the	 auspicious	 event	 of	 Duryodhana
losing	everything.”
Shakuni	 merely	 smiled	 and	 threw	 the	 dice.	 Once	 again	 the	 bones	 rolled.	 A
lucky	 talisman,	 crafted	 by	 a	 superstitious	 country	 clashed	 with	 the	 skill	 of	 a
master	strategist.	“Aha!	I	win.”	Shakuni	said,	raising	one	hand	in	victory.
Yudhishtra	sat	in	shocked	silence.	He	had	lost	everything.	Again.	A	crow	cawed
from	 the	 garden,	 seeming	 to	 mock	 him.	 The	 crow	 was	 considered	 to	 be	 the
vehicle	 of	 Shaneeswara;	 the	 God	 of	 Misfortune	 was	 calling	 him.	 It	 was	 his
destiny	 to	 bear	 this	 with	 a	 calm	 mind.	 He	 felt	 bitter	 thinking	 of	 the	 countless
hours	 he	 had	 spent	 in	 prayer,	 in	 fasting,	 for	 the	 hours	 spent	 in	 studying	 the
scriptures.	 In	 the	 moment	 it	 mattered,	 the	 Gods	 had	 forsaken	 him.	 Dharmo
rakshithi	 rakshitaha	 (Dharma	 will	 protect	 he	 who	 protects	 dharma)	 –	 his
Guru’s	 words	 echoed	 in	 his	 ears.	 He	 could	 feel	 the	 heat	 of	 Draupadi’s
accusation	and	contempt	searing	his	skin;	he	could	hear	Bhima’s	anger	in	his
laboured	breathing.	He,	son	of	dharma,	had	lost	everything	to	a	foreigner.	The

Suta	 was	 laughing	 at	 him;	 men	 were	 ogling	 his	 wife;	 and	 his	 brothers	 were
standing	with	heads	bowed.	‘Lords	of	heaven,	why	are	you	punishing	me	like
this?’
After	a	few	moments	of	utter	disbelief,	Yudhishtra	stood	up	and	shook	out	the
folds	of	his	dhoti	 –	 the	 only	 possession	 left	 to	 him.	 Bhima,	 almost	 blue	 with
rage,	shouted	across	the	Sabha	that	once	they	returned	he	would	personally	rip
apart	Duryodhana	and	his	brothers	with	his	bare	hands.
Arjuna	 ignored	 all	 the	 others	 and	 pointed	 a	 finger	 at	 Karna.	 “Suta,	 you	 have
won	for	now,	but	do	not	doubt	that	we	will	meet	in	battle,	when	we	will	finish
this.”
Karna	bowed	low.	“Arjuna,	rest	assured	I	will	be	waiting	for	you.”
At	 the	 massive	 doors	 of	 the	 Sabha,	 which	 towered	 over	 him	 like	 a	 tomb,
Yudhishtra	 hesitated	 for	 a	 moment.	 He	 waited	 with	 the	 forlorn	 hope	 that
Bhishma	would	call	him	back,	or	perhaps	the	King	would	ask	Draupadi	to	seek
the	 third	 boon	 he	 had	 promised,	 or	 that	 Guru	 Drona	 would	 speak.	 He	 heard
Draupadi’s	voice,	as	cold	as	the	ice	on	the	Himalayas,	hiss	in	his	ear,	“Walk!”
With	bent	head,	Yudhishtra	walked	into	the	afternoon	sun.	The	guards	standing
on	 either	 side	 remained	 upright.	 Somewhere	 in	 the	 distance,	 thunder	 rolled,
sounding	like	frenzied	war	drums.
Draupadi	 followed	 her	 husbands	 out	 of	 the	 Sabha,	 wrapped	 only	 in	 her	 sari,
her	 head	 held	 proudly	 erect,	 her	 hair	 flying	 wildly	 in	 the	 playful	 breeze.	 She
glared	 at	 Duryodhana	 and	 Karna	 as	 she	 passed	 them.	 The	 hatred	 burning	 in
those	fiery	black	eyes	sent	a	chill	down	their	spines.
Shakuni	 breathed	 a	 sigh	 of	 relief.	 The	 Sabha	 had	 ended	 but	 the	 courtiers
refused	 to	 disperse.	 They	 clustered	 in	 groups	 and	 discussed	 the	 rights	 and
wrongs	of	what	had	happened.	Shakuni	looked	at	them	with	disdain.	It	had	not
gone	 as	 perfectly	 as	 he	 had	 planned,	 but	 nevertheless	 it	 was	 a	 victory,
considering	everything.	It	had	been	touch	and	go	with	Gandhari	interfering	and
making	a	mess	of	his	plans.	Fortunately,	the	fool	Yudhishtra	fell	into	the	trap
he	had	set.	He	could	still	hear	the	faint	sounds	of	the	procession	accompanying
the	Pandavas	out	of	the	city.	Gandhari	was	speaking	to	Suyodhana,	but	Shakuni
did	not	want	to	stand	and	listen	to	his	sister ’s	harsh	words.	Lazily,	he	walked

through	the	massive	 archway	that	separated	the	Sabha	from	the	wide	veranda
which	 ran	 around	 the	 hall.	 He	 paused	 to	 admire	 the	 intricate	 carvings	 on	 the
ceiling.	Though	it	was	late	afternoon,	the	air	was	hot	and	dust	swirled	outside
the	fort,	creating	a	haze	all	around.
Effeminate	 Indians!	 Which	 husband	 sat	 and	 watched	 someone	 strip	 his	 wife?
Which	husband	wagered	his	wife	in	dice?	In	his	country,	men	died	to	protect
the	honour	of	women.	His	fellow	Gandharans	would	never	believe	such	things
could	 happen.	 The	 audacity	 of	 these	 Indians	 to	 call	 themselves	 the	 greatest
culture	 in	 the	 world!	 It	 was	 time	 to	 get	 out,	 time	 to	 visit	 the	 motherland.	 He
needed	to	take	care	of	a	few	things	and	then	he	would	go	back	to	Gandhara.	It
would	be	the	start	of	winter	there	and	all	would	be	painted	white	–	the	colour	of
purity,	of	God	–	unlike	the	dust	and	grime	of	India.
Suddenly,	Shakuni’s	hard	eyes	caught	sight	of	a	stranger	talking	to	Jayadratha.
He	looked	travel	worn	and	agitated.	What	was	he	saying	to	the	King	of	Sindh?
When	the	man	turned,	his	gaze	froze	on	Shakuni’s	face	and	his	jaw	dropped.
Jayadratha	 followed	 his	 companion’s	 gaze	 and	 frowned.	 Shakuni	 saw
Aswathama	 join	 Jayadratha	 and	 they	 all	 stood	 staring	 at	 him.	 Something	 was
wrong.
*****

2			ESCAPE
	
SHAKUNI’S	 HEART	 POUNDED	 LIKE	 THAT	 of	 a	 cornered	 beast.	 He	 had	 to	 get	 to

Gandhara	quickly.	He	needed	a	horse.	He	hurried	towards	the	stables,	weaving
through	 the	 men	 grouped	 outside	 the	 Sabha	 discussing	 the	 day’s	 events.	 He
could	hear	someone	following	him	and	his	walk	became	a	trot.	He	could	sense
danger	behind	him	but	did	not	dare	to	look	back	as	he	hurried	to	the	stables.
The	smell	of	horse	dung	and	urine	assaulted	his	senses.	The	man	in	charge	of
the	 royal	 stables	 was	 sitting	 with	 his	 head	 hung,	 as	 if	 in	 shame,	 his	 hands
supporting	his	forehead.	Worry	creased	the	face	already	lined	by	the	sun.	In	the
slanting	afternoon	light	the	tired	eyes	glistened	with	tears	but	Athiratha	did	not
move	even	when	Shakuni	reached	him	and	impatiently	shook	his	shoulder.	The
charioteer	sprang	up	with	a	start,	shocked	that	a	noble	had	touched	him.	When
he	saw	who	it	was,	Athiratha	relaxed.
“What	has	happened	to	you?”	Shakuni	asked	Karna’s	father.
“My	son	died	today,	Swami.	What	is	the	use	of	education	and	learning	if	you
cannot	 use	 them?	 How	 will	 I	 tell	 his	 mother	 how	 her	 Karna	 behaved	 today?
How	could	he	behave	like	that	to	a	woman?	He	was	never	my	son...	and	never
will	be.”
As	 Athiratha	 rambled	 on	 about	 his	 son’s	 fall	 from	 grace,	 Shakuni’s	 eyes
scanned	the	area	for	danger.	His	heart	skipped	a	beat	when	he	saw	Aswathama
running	towards	them.	“Athiratha,	get	me	a	horse	quickly.”	Shakuni	threw	his
gold	bracelet	to	the	amazed	charioteer.
Athiratha	caught	it	by	reflex	and	then	looked	down	at	it	as	if	he	was	holding	a
live	snake	in	his	hand.	“Swami,	are	you	joking	with	me?	I	have	many	faults	but
I	have	never	stooped	to	taking	bribes.	I	have	lived	an	honest	life...”
“Athiratha,	hurry!”	Shakuni	smashed	both	his	fists	on	the	stable	wall.

Karna’s	father	flinched	at	the	uncharacteristic	display	of	anger	by	this	usually
cool	 and	 controlled	 foreigner.	 “You	 are	 the	 Queen’s	 brother,	 Swami.	 Please
take	whichever	horse	you	wish,”	Athiratha	said	in	a	flat	tone.
Aswathama	shouted	at	Shakuni	to	stop.	He	was	so	close.	Shakuni	jumped	into
the	saddle	of	the	nearest	horse	as	Aswathama	leapt	over	the	fence	and	lurched
at	 Shakuni,	 making	 a	 grab	 for	 the	 reins.	 Shakuni	 kicked	 off	 his	 hands	 as	 the
horse	 jumped	 the	 gate	 and	 shot	 forward.	 Aswathama	 ran	 after	 him	 for	 a	 few
yards,	coughing	in	the	cloud	of	dust	thrown	up	by	the	galloping	horse.
“Where	was	he	going?”	Aswathama	asked	Athiratha,	panting.
“I	 don’t	 talk	 to	 scoundrels	 who	 misbehave	 with	 women.”	 Athiratha	 slammed
the	stable	door	shut	in	Aswathama’s	face.
The	 Brahmin	 kicked	 the	 stable	 door	 with	 all	 the	 force	 he	 could	 muster,
battering	 it	 with	 both	 fists,	 but	 the	 door	 remained	 closed.	 Defeated,	 he	 turned
and	shook	his	fist	at	Shakuni,	now	a	black	dot	on	the	horizon.
***
The	 two	 guards	 bowed	 and	 backed	 out	 silently.	 They	 knew	 when	 to	 leave	 the
Grand	 Regent	 alone.	 They	 closed	 the	 massive	 doors	 and	 stood	 outside,	 their
spears	crossed	over	the	door	to	prevent	anyone	entering	the	chamber.
Bhishma	 wanted	 to	 be	 alone.	 The	 lone,	 six	 foot	 oil	 lamp	 that	 stood	 in	 the
corner,	 threw	 gigantic	 shadows,	 making	 the	 huge	 chairs,	 upholstered	 diwans
and	 decorated	 pillars	 look	 like	 crouching	 beasts.	 Bhishma	 paced	 the	 room,
shaking	 his	 head	 forlornly.	 However	 hard	 he	 tried,	 the	 image	 of	 a	 pleading
Draupadi	refused	to	leave	his	mind.	Had	he	lowered	the	prestige	of	the	Kurus?
Why	 had	 he	 not	 put	 a	 stop	 to	 the	 shame?	 He	 could	 have	 ordered	 it	 done	 and
even	 arrested	 the	 two	 fools	 who	 were	 gambling	 with	 what	 did	 not	 belong	 to
them.	 The	 country	 belonged	 to	 him,	 Devavrata	 Gangadatta	 Bhishma.
Dhritarashtra	and	his	sons	merely	enjoyed	what	he	had	gifted	them.
When	had	the	Kshatriyas	of	the	Kuru	clan	started	thinking	partially?	A	woman
was	shamed	and	it	did	not	matter	who	had	shamed	her.	He	should	have	punished
the	culprits.	Perhaps	Suyodhana	had	been	justified	in	doing	what	he	had	done.

The	Pandavas	were	his	grand-nephews	too,	but	there	was	a	difference.	Unlike
Suyodhana,	 they	 did	 not	 have	 the	 blue	 blood	 of	 the	 Kurus	 flowing	 in	 their
veins.	 The	 shame	 of	 five	 Pandava	 brothers	 sharing	 the	 same	 woman	 still
rankled.	 He	 had	 never	 understood	 it.	 Years	 of	 forced	 bachelorhood	 and	 selfwilled	 celibacy	 had	 made	 him	 bitter,	 though	 he	 was	 always	 a	 thorough
gentleman	in	his	demeanour.	No	one	showed	more	respect	to	women	in	public,
no	 one	 was	 more	 decorous	 in	 his	 courtesies	 nor	 so	 polite	 in	 his	 speech	 than
him.	 In	 public,	 he	 always	 supported	 women	 taking	 an	 active	 role	 in	 the
administration	of	the	country.
But	 in	 his	 heart	 he	 despised	 all	 women,	 especially	 women	 like	 Kunti	 and
Gandhari,	who	were	not	content	to	live	in	the	antapura	and	played	politics.	His
heart	had	hardened	after	what	Kunti	and	Gandhari’s	internal	strife	and	intrigues
had	done	to	the	country.	He	still	rued	the	day	he	had	permitted	them	to	attend
the	Sabha.	Gandhari	had	even	had	the	audacity	to	chide	the	King	today.	That	it
had	taken	a	woman	to	speak	the	words	he	should	have	uttered,	made	him	all	the
more	 bitter.	 Dhritarashtra	 had	 surprised	 him	 with	 his	 generosity,	 by	 giving
back	all	that	Yudhishtra	had	lost.	Had	not	the	young	fool	fallen	for	Shakuni’s
tricks,	 the	 entire	 world	 would	 have	 now	 been	 praising	 the	 greatness	 of	 the
blind	 King	 –	 a	 King	 who	 had	 taken	 the	 right	 decision	 when	 a	 great	 man	 like
Bhishma	remained	silent,	a	King	who	had	the	grace	to	ask	for	forgiveness	of	a
woman	who	had	been	wronged.	Bhishma	had	never	known	Dhritarashtra	to	act
so	 decisively	 and	 that	 too,	 angered	 him.	 He	 was	 losing	 his	 grip	 on	 the	 King.
Things	 were	 getting	 out	 of	 his	 control.	 Bhishma	 hated	 Draupadi	 for	 having
made	him	into	a	man	who	did	not	do	the	right	thing	when	it	mattered.	He	was
terrified	 that	 history	 would	 stand	 in	 judgement	 because	 of	 his	 silence.	 That
woman	had	no	business	sharing	five	men.
With	 a	 shock	 he	 realised	 he	 was	 thinking	 like	 the	 Suta,	 that	 Draupadi	 was
immoral	 because	 she	 had	 five	 husbands.	 He	 could	 bear	 anything	 but	 the
laughter	 of	 the	 Suta.	 How	 dare	 Karna	 come	 to	 his	 palace	 and	 mock	 his
granddaughter-in-law?	 In	 his	 rage,	 Bhishma	 forgot	 that	 Karna	 was	 not	 the
reason	 why	 his	 beloved	 Suyodhana	 had	 behaved	 like	 a	 street	 ruffian.
‘Uncultured	boor,	son	of	a	charioteer,’	he	fumed.
Suddenly,	Bhishma	remembered	something	and	rushed	to	his	table.	He	ruffled
through	various	messages	and	threw	down	the	scrolls	of	birch	and	palm	leaves
after	a	quick	glance	at	each.	Where	was	that	message?	When	he	had	received

the	message	from	the	Southern	Confederate	that	morning,	he	had	not	given	it
much	 thought.	 It	 was	 written	 in	 the	 bombastic	 language	 typical	 to	 the	 South,
with	 couched	 threats	 hidden	 in	 oblique	 praise.	 He	 had	 dismissed	 the	 usual
banter	about	the	South	invading	Hastinapura	and	not	given	a	second	thought	to
their	demand	to	hand	over	Karna.	He	had	not	even	thought	it	worth	discussing
in	the	Sabha.	Now,	an	idea	started	forming	in	his	mind.	He	could	do	something
that	would	save	his	face.	He	would	sacrifice	the	Suta	and	become	a	hero	again.
Bhishma	was	afraid	that	one	day	the	rivalry	between	his	grand-nephews	would
flare	up	to	destroy	his	beloved	country.	And	that	Suta	upstart	was	a	danger	to
both	sides.
For	a	moment,	Karna’s	handsome	face	came	to	mind;	the	Suta	who	had	had	the
courage	to	challenge	the	Kshatriyas.	A	grudging	respect	for	the	underdog	who
has	fought	his	way	up	made	Bhishma	hesitate	in	his	decision.	Then	he	slammed
the	message	on	the	table	and	drew	to	his	full	height.	He	had	to	do	it	for	the	sake
of	 the	 country.	 The	 thought	 gave	 him	 courage	 and	 helped	 him	 push	 away
considerations	 of	 fairness.	 The	 Suta	 had	 to	 be	 finished.	 Without	 Karna,	 he
could	 control	 Suyodhana	 and	 remain	 kingmaker.	 No,	 he	 was	 not	 hungry	 for
power;	Bhishma	hastily	corrected	the	insidious	thought.	His	life	was	a	sacrifice
–	 for	 his	 father	 in	 his	 youth,	 for	 his	 nephews	 in	 his	 middle	 age,	 and	 for	 his
grand-nephews	in	the	twilight	of	his	life;	a	life	lived	for	others.	He	smiled	at
the	thought,	pleased	with	himself.
Bhishma	 called	 the	 guards	 and	 asked	 for	 Senanayak	 Mahaveera.	 Without
turning	 to	 look	 at	 the	 bewildered	 Captain,	 he	 said	 in	 a	 voice	 from	 which	 all
emotion	had	been	banished,	“Arrest	the	King	of	Anga	and	hand	him	over	to	the
Southern	Confederate.”
As	 the	 Captain	 bowed	 and	 went	 out,	 the	 guards	 closed	 the	 door,	 leaving	 the
Grand	Regent	to	his	solitary	state.
*****

3			ARREST
	
SUYODHANA	 WAS	 STARTLED	 TO	 SEE	Aswathama	and	Jayadratha	emerge	from	the

darkness.	He	looked	at	them	in	surprise	as	they	brushed	past	him	and	entered
Shakuni’s	chamber.	The	bells	over	the	door	jangled	in	protest.	A	moth	whizzed
past	and	dived	into	a	flaming	torch,	filling	the	air	with	an	acerbic	odour.
“Shakuni	has	escaped,”	Aswathama	said,	challenging	Suyodhana	to	contradict
him.
“He	may	have	gone	for	a	walk,”	Suyodhana	suggested,	avoiding	looking	at	the
infuriated	Brahmin.
“A	 long	 walk	 indeed!	 He	 may	 have	 even	 got	 halfway	 to	 Gandhara	 by	 now,”
retorted	Aswathama.
The	 mouldy	 smell	 of	 the	 room	 mixed	 with	 the	 distinctive	 perfume	 Shakuni
always	 wore.	 Suyodhana	 pulled	 the	 burning	 torch	 from	 the	 wall.	 Night
withdrew	wherever	the	circle	of	light	touched	it	and	rushed	back	as	soon	as	it
was	turned	away.	Insects	scurried	to	hide	in	the	crevices	of	the	walls.
“No!	 No!”	 exclaimed	 Suyodhana,	 his	 voice	 hoarse	 with	 repressed	 anger	 and
denial.	“Uncle	Shakuni...”	His	hands	shook,	making	the	circle	of	light	vibrate.
The	 curtains	 moved	 restlessly	 in	 the	 breeze	 and	 shadows	 danced	 around	 the
room.
Aswathama	put	a	hand	on	his	friend’s	shoulder.	“He	betrayed	and	tricked	us.”
Suyodhana	 knocked	 off	 his	 friend’s	 hand	 and	 began	 rummaging	 in	 the
cupboards.	He	overturned	the	bed,	emptied	the	drawers	and	then	smashed	them
shut.	If	he	did	not	do	something	he	would	go	crazy.	Beads	of	sweat	formed	on
his	creased	forehead.

Jayadratha	 stood	 at	 the	 window,	 watching.	 He	 had	 been	 surprised	 by
Suyodhana’s	behaviour	today.	He	had	made	a	bad	bargain	in	marrying	Sushala,
Suyodhana’s	sister.	He	had	expected	to	grow	his	kingdom	with	the	help	of	the
imperial	 Hastinapura	 army	 and	 had	 counted	 on	 Suyodhana	 to	 support	 his
expansion	 plans.	 The	 new	 city	 of	 Dwaraka	 and	 the	 riches	 of	 Krishna’s	 land
were	 inviting.	 But	 Suyodhana	 was	 too	 preoccupied	 with	 the	 rivalry	 with	 his
cousins	 to	 pay	 attention	 to	 his	 brother-in-law.	 Nor	 did	 Sushala	 make	 things
easier	 for	 Jayadratha	 with	 her	 constant	 comparisons	 of	 him	 to	 her	 brother.
They	had	a	son	now,	whom	Sushala	desired	to	raise	to	be	like	Suyodhana.	He
could	hardly	wait	to	tell	her	how	her	high-minded,	perfect,	Kshatriya	brother
had	behaved	in	the	Sabha	today.	And	the	way	Suyodhana	pampered	a	low-caste
like	Karna	made	his	blood	boil	with	rage.	He	spat	out	a	stream	of	red	betel	nut
juice,	watching	it	clear	the	veranda	and	land	in	the	flowerbed	below.	There	was
a	 pale	 moon	 playing	 hide-and-seek	 with	 the	 clouds	 and	 the	 palace	 was	 eerily
still.	 In	 the	 distance	 he	 could	 hear	 the	 sound	 of	 marching	 feet	 and	 a	 frown
creased	his	forehead.
“Remember	this?”	Aswathama	held	up	something	in	one	hand.	Suyodhana	did
not	 want	 to	 look.	 It	 would	 make	 everything	 final.	 He	 wiped	 his	 forehead,	 a
lump	forming	in	his	throat.	Aswathama	moved	towards	the	light	and	held	out	a
white	 shawl.	 It	 was	 the	 same	 one	 which	 had	 almost	 indicted	 him	 in	 Bhima’s
murder	trial	years	before.
The	 torch	 fell	 from	 Suyodhana’s	 hand	 and	 lay	 smoking	 at	 his	 feet,	 making
their	eyes	sting.	“I	did	a	despicable	thing	today.”	Suyodhana’s	voice	and	body
shook	 with	 emotion.	 “How	 will	 I	 face	 Bhanumati	 or	 my	 mother?	 How	 will	 I
face	the	people	of	my	country?”
“Shakuni	made	us	do	it,	we	were	stupid,”	Jayadratha	snapped,	secretly	enjoying
Suyodhana’s	 predicament.	 He	 wanted	 to	 see	 his	 wife’s	 face	 when	 he	 narrated
the	incident	to	her.	Her	noble	brother	and	his	great	acts.	Jayadratha	wanted	to
laugh.
Aswathama	was	digging	through	the	Gandharan	Prince’s	possessions.	“Look	at
this...and	 this...and	 this...”	 He	 threw	 down	 some	 palm	 leaves.	 They	 lay	 on	 the
floor	 mocking	 Suyodhana’s	 naivety.	 “Do	 you	 understand	 what	 they	 are?
Documents	 about	 the	 arms	 smuggled	 into	 our	 country,	 cryptic	 replies	 from
Durjaya.	Everything	is	falling	into	place.	Ask	Jayadratha!	Ask	him	what	his	spy

told	him.	Evil	Mlecha!”
“Suyodhana,	 Durjaya	 and	 his	 men	 are	 being	 trained	 in	 Gandhara.	 They	 will
wreak	 havoc	 in	 our	 cities	 soon.	 Your	 Uncle...”	 Jayadratha’s	 voice	 trailed	 off
when	he	looked	into	Suyodhana’s	face.
“Enough!”	Suyodhana	shook	his	head.	Red	heat	was	rising	behind	his	eyelids.
He	closed	them.	No,	his	uncle	would	never	do	it,	but…
“I	almost	caught	him	but	he	managed	to	escape.	I	would	have	chased	after	him
but	at	that	crucial	moment	I	didn’t	have	a	horse.	Athiratha	slammed	the	stable
doors	 on	 my	 face	 saying	 he	 would	 not	 speak	 to	 women	 abusers,”	 said
Aswathama	bitterly.
“Where	is	Karna?”	Suyodhana	asked.
“With	Vrishali.	She	is	giving	him	hell	for	his	act	today.”
Suyodhana	rushed	out	and	his	friends	followed.	They	were	surprised	to	see	a
troop	of	guards	marching	down	the	corridor.	Suyodhana	broke	into	a	run	and
commanded	 them	 to	 halt	 but	 they	 ignored	 him	 and	 continued	 to	 march	 in
cadence.	 Aswathama	 and	 Jayadratha	 raced	 through	 the	 gardens	 and	 reached
Karna’s	room	just	before	the	soldiers	and	Suyodhana.
The	troop	halted	and	the	Captain	stepped	out	and	addressed	the	Crown	Prince.
“Sir,	pray,	move	aside.	We	are	here	to	arrest	His	Highness	Vasusena	Karna,	as
per	the	orders	of	the	Grand	Regent.”
“Just	 try	 it,”	 Aswathama	 suggested	 belligerently,	 pointing	 at	 the	 young
Captain’s	chest.
To	his	enduring	credit,	the	Captain	stood	his	ground.	“Sir,	pray,	allow	us	to	do
our	duty.	We	would	not	like	to	use	force.”
“Tell	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 that	 Karna	 is	 not	 available,”	 Aswathama	 said	 and
shoved	the	Captain	back.
The	 scene	 was	 becoming	 uglier	 by	 the	 minute	 as	 the	 soldiers	 got	 ready	 to
charge.

“What	 is	 going	 on	 here?”	 Suyodhana	 was	 relieved	 to	 hear	 Vidhura’s	 voice.
The	Prime	Minister	came	hurrying	towards	them	and	the	soldiers	bowed	low.
“Sir,	what	is	all	this?”	Aswathama	enquired	of	Vidhura.
***
Karna	 knew	 the	 very	 air	 of	 this	 palace	 was	 oppressive	 to	 Vrishali.	 She	 had
boiled	with	rage	when	her	maid	told	her	what	had	occurred	in	the	Sabha.	How
could	a	man	like	Karna	stoop	to	this	level,	she	had	asked.	He	had	no	answer.
“You	 are	 not	 the	 Karna	 I	 know,”	 she	 finally	 said.	 He	 had	 behaved	 like	 a
common	 lout,	 ordering	 a	 woman	 to	 be	 stripped	 in	 public.	 He	 had	 tried	 to
justify	himself	saying	Draupadi	had	insulted	him	and	she	was	just	a	whore	who
shared	her	bed	with	five	men.	But	Vrishali	had	lifted	an	eyebrow	in	disdain	and
asked	 whether	 it	 was	 his	 bitterness	 towards	 Draupadi	 for	 spurning	 him	 as	 a
suitor	 that	 made	 him	 hate	 her.	 He	 had	 looked	 away	 knowing	 it	 was	 true	 but
unable	to	admit	it	even	to	himself.	Deep	in	the	recesses	of	his	troubled	heart,
Karna	still	loved	Draupadi.
Karna’s	justifications	grew	weaker	as	time	went	by.	When	he	said	he	had	done
it	for	his	friend,	something	snapped	inside.	Was	it	fair	to	blame	Suyodhana	for
what	he	had	done?
“Let	us	leave	all	this,	Karna,	and	go	far	from	here,	where	no	one	knows	who
we	are,”	Vrishali	begged	earnestly.
Before	 he	 could	 answer,	 there	 was	 an	 urgent	 banging	 on	 the	 door.	 Karna
quickly	strode	over	to	open	it,	glad	of	the	reprieve	it	gave	him	from	answering
his	 wife.	 Aswathama’s	 face	 stared	 up	 at	 him.	 In	 the	 dim	 light	 he	 saw	 armed
soldiers	behind	his	friend.
“Karna,	run!	I’ll	hold	these	scoundrels,”	Aswathama	shouted,	pushing	back	the
Captain.	The	soldiers	clanged	their	swords	against	their	shields	in	warning.
“Run?”	Karna	asked,	jerking	back	his	head.	“But	why?”
Karna	 saw	 Suyodhana’s	 worried	 face	 appear.	 He	 looked	 back	 at	 Vrishali	 and
flinched	at	the	look	of	hatred	those	eyes	bore	towards	his	friend.	‘No,	Vrishali,
Suyodhana	is	not	to	blame,’	he	wanted	to	say.	There	was	so	much	to	explain	to

her.	Karna	looked	at	her	heavily	pregnant	body,	wanting	to	protect	her	from	all
harm,	but	Suyodhana	grasped	his	arm.
“You	are	not	running	anywhere;	let	us	see	the	Grand	Regent.”
As	the	tall	form	of	Karna	stepped	forward	to	walk	beside	his	 friends,	behind
them	the	soldiers	of	Hastinapura	stood	ready	to	arrest	him	at	the	slightest	nod
from	the	Grand	Regent	and	hand	him	over	to	the	Confederate.
*****

4 			THE	CHALLENGE
	
BHISHMA	 ORDERED	 THE	 GUARDS	 TO	 OPEN 	

the	 door	 to	 his	 chambers.	 Prince
Suyodhana	 entered.	 “My	 apologies	 for	 disturbing	 your	 rest,	 Pitamaha,	 but
Karna,	King	of	Anga,	wishes	to	speak	with	you	urgently.”
Bhishma	frowned,	undecided.	His	mind	was	in	turmoil.	He	knew	he	was	being
unfair	to	the	Suta.	When	he	took	his	decision,	he	had	acted	to	save	face.	Now,
the	 prospective	 of	 having	 to	 face	 Karna	 made	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 uneasy.	 The
last	 thing	 he	 wanted	 was	 to	 see	 Suyodhana	 or	 his	 cronies.	 ‘Scoundrels!
Shameless	creatures!’	he	told	himself,	trying	to	recapture	the	rage	he	had	felt
scorching	him	that	afternoon.
Karna	entered	and	bowed.	What	was	this	Suta	doing	in	his	chambers?	He	had	to
be	 bundled	 off	 to	 the	 South	 without	 delay.	 He	 could	 not	 look	 into	 Karna
glowing	 eyes.	 What	 strange	 eyes	 the	 Suta	 had,	 Bhishma	 thought	 irrelevantly
for	a	moment.	He	was	about	to	order	them	out	when	Vidhura	entered.
“Yes,	honourable	Prince?	Who	is	your	next	victim?	Are	even	your	mother	and
sister	safe?”	Bhishma	asked	testily,	unwilling	to	acknowledge	Karna	even	by	a
stare.	A	guard	came	in	and	lit	the	lamps	in	the	room.	Bhishma’s	eyes	caught	the
glitter	of	diamond	ear	studs	in	Karna’s	ears	and	felt	irrational	rage.	Karna	was
making	 him	 look	 small.	 “Yes?”	 Bhishma’s	 eyebrows	 arched,	 a	 distasteful
frown	wrinkling	his	brow.
Suyodhana	 was	 taken	 aback	 by	 his	 grandsire’s	 icy	 tone.	 “I…I	 deeply	 regret
what	has	happened,	but	why	arrest	Karna?”
“And	you	have	nothing	more	to	say	than	you	deeply	regret...?”	Bhishma	moved
closer	to	the	Crown	Prince.
“Pitamaha,	that	woman	insulted	me.	You	know	what	happened	at	Indraprastha.	I
am	a	Kshatriya.	You	cannot	expect	me	to	take	such	an	insult	lying	down.	I	stood

naked	in	their	court.	I	was	ridiculed	and	shamed.	How	do	you	want	me	to	take
it?”	Suyodhana’s	anger	rose.	Why	was	everyone	blaming	only	him?	Was	it	his
fault	Yudhishtra	had	gambled	and	lost?
“You	 are	 destroying	 this	 country.”	 Bhishma’s	 nostrils	 flared.	 His	 eyes	 were
cold	and	hard.
“Destroying	this	country?	I	didn’t	see	this	anger	when	the	Pandavas	destroyed
Khandivaprastha.	 I	 didn’t	 see	 you	 take	 action	 when	 my	 Aunt	 Kunti	 had	 six
Nishadas	murdered.”	Enough!	He	was	not	going	to	take	these	accusations	lying
down	anymore.	They	were	all	partial	to	his	cousins	–	Pitamaha,	Guru	Drona,
everyone.	Only	his	friends	had	stood	by	him.
“How	dare	you	talk	to	an	elder	in	this	fashion,	Suyodhana?”
“Pitamaha,	I	am	not	a	child.	I	won	this	country.”
“Won	this	country?	Has	this	Suta	given	you	such	silly	ideas?	He	is	going	to	be
your	ruin,	young	man.”
“What	 has	 happened	 to	 make	 you	 so	 angry,	 Pitamaha?	 We	 only	 threatened	 to
strip	her,	we	did	not...”
“You	arrogant	fool!	How	dare	you	try	to	justify	your	behaviour?”
“Sir,	I	did	not	touch	the	woman.”
“Leave	this	room,	now!”
“If	you	wish.	But	tell	me	why	you	are	arresting	Karna.”
“Because	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 wants	 his	 head.	 Because	 he	 cheated	 his
Guru.	They	have	declared	war	on	Hastinapura.	If	I	do	not	hand	over	this	Suta,
they	will	ransack	Hastinapura.”
“Sir,	what	is	my	crime?”	Karna	asked,	lifting	his	eyes	to	the	Grandsire’s	face.
Bhishma	 covered	 his	 hesitation	 in	 a	 bout	 of	 coughing.	 He	 did	 not	 have	 an
answer.	 The	 Suta’s	 eyes	 pierced	 his	 conscience.	 “I	 will	 not	 spill	 my	 soldiers’

blood	over	a	Suta.”
“Sir,	 I	 am	 a	 low-caste	 but	 am	 I	 not	 a	 warrior	 too?	 I	 have	 fought	 for
Hastinapura.	I	have	protected	her	whenever	she	has	been	threatened.	Allow	me
a	 warrior ’s	 death,	 not	 that	 of	 a	 criminal.	 I	 request	 this	 from	 one	 warrior	 to
another,”	Karna	said.
“Warrior?	A	man	who	condones	the	stripping	of	a	woman	in	public	cannot	call
himself	a	warrior.”
“Yes,	it	was	a	grave	mistake.	Will	you	forever	hold	it	against	us?	Is	there	no
place	for	forgiveness	in	your	eyes,	Sir?”	Karna	asked,	desperation	in	his	voice.
“You	 know	 that	 woman	 got	 what	 she	 deserved.”	 Suyodhana	 glared	 back
defiantly	at	his	great-uncle.
Karna	quickly	moved	to	the	fore,	pushing	back	his	angry	friend.	He	bowed	low
before	Bhishma.	“Sir,	please	accept	my	apologies.	I	beg	your	pardon	for	our
dishonourable	conduct.	Allow	me	a	chance	to	fight	my	enemies.”
“Fight?	You	think	you	can	fight	Parashurama?”
“Jayadratha	 has	 three	 thousand	 men	 and	 complete	 trust	 in	 Karna’s	 abilities.
Karna	can	lead	the	soldiers	of	Sindh	to	take	on	the	Southern	Confederate.	We
just	need	your	permission,”	said	Suyodhana.
Jayadratha,	standing	in	a	corner	of	the	chamber	with	Aswathama,	was	shocked
to	hear	it.	Why	should	he	lend	his	soldiers	to	the	Suta?	How	could	his	brotherin-law	promise	his	friend	what	was	not	his?	He	mulled	over	the	proposal	in	his
mind	 and	 decided	 to	 wait	 till	 he	 knew	 what	 came	 of	 this	 interesting
conversation.	Maybe	he	could	make	a	bargain	with	Suyodhana,	for	the	favour
he	was	doing.
Bhishma	 gave	 a	 snort.	 “Three	 thousand	 men	 and	 this	 Suta	 to	 lead	 them?	 To
face	an	army	numbering	a	lakh	of	men?	Led	by	none	other	than	Parashurama
himself.	 Do	 you	 not	 know	 I	 fought	 him	 for	 six	 hard	 months,	 with	 the	 entire
might	 of	 Hastinapura	 behind	 me?	 Did	 I	 claim	 victory?	 All	 I	 got	 was	 a
disadvantageous	 truce!	 Do	 you	 young	 hotheads	 even	 know	 what	 you	 are
saying?”

Suyodhana	looked	at	the	Grand	Regent	and	said	clearly,	“Sir,	Karna	has	done
nothing	wrong.”
“Vidhura,	are	they	crazy	or	just	plain	stupid?	Fools!	Now	listen	to	me.	If	you
want	 to	 fight	 this	 war,	 fight	 it	 far	 from	 Hastinapura.	 Suta,	 your	 ego	 and
arrogance	are	galling,	but	I	will	not	stop	you.	Just	stay	away	from	my	city.”
“Sir,	we	will	take...”	Suyodhana	stopped	short	when	Bhishma	raised	his	hand.
“We?	Who	is	this	‘we’?	You	are	not	going	anywhere,	Suyodhana.	I	cannot,	in
all	 conscience,	 send	 you	 on	 such	 a	 suicidal	 mission.	 You	 will	 stay	 here	 in
Hastinapura	and	learn	to	rule.	You	have	done	a	shameful	thing	today.	You	will
have	to	learn	to	face	your	subjects.	You	cannot	run	from	your	responsibilities.
Let	this	Suta	fight	and	die	at	the	hands	of	the	Southern	Confederate.	I	will	not
stop	him.”
“I	do	not	expect	Prince	Suyodhana	to	come	with	me,”	Karna	said.
Bhishma	 stared	 at	 them	 and	 then	 said	 to	 Suyodhana,	 his	 face	 expressionless,
“At	least	the	Suta	has	some	sense.”
“Sir,	you	are	insulting	me,”	retorted	Suyodhana,	his	eyes	ablaze.
“It	was	meant	to	be	so.	Neither	you	nor	your	cousin	Yudhishtra	are	fit	to	rule.
You	have	demonstrated	that	to	the	whole	world	today.”
“Pitamaha!	 Do	 you	 not	 yourself	 cling	 to	 power?	 How	 can	 you	 then	 accuse
everyone	else	of	being	fools?”
Bhishma	remained	standing,	his	face	devoid	of	expression.	Vidhura	rushed	to
Bhishma.	 Still	 staring	 at	 Suyodhana,	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 slowly	 sat,	 his	 head
bent,	 not	 wanting	 these	 young	 men	 to	 catch	 him	 in	 a	 moment	 of	 weakness.
After	all	the	sacrifices	he	had	made,	after	all	the	wars	he	had	fought,	after	all
the	hard	work,	this	is	what	he	got;	he	bit	his	lips	in	bitterness.	Power!	When	had
he	ever	been	hungry	for	power?	He	had	always	carried	it	as	a	burden.	He	could
have	been	King,	yet	he	had	remained	true	to	his	vow,	and	this	is	what	he	got	for
his	sacrifice.	And	that	too	from	the	boy	he	had	loved	the	most.	This	ungrateful
lad!	 Was	 this	 Suta	 so	 important	 that	 Suyodhana	 would	 speak	 to	 him	 so?	 The
Crown	Prince	had	to	be	saved	from	Karna.	Hastinapura	had	to	be	saved	from

this	arrogant	low-caste	upstart.
Only	 the	 white-knuckled	 grip	 on	 the	 armrests	 betrayed	 the	 Grand	 Regent’s
emotions.	‘Three	decades	of	selfless	service	and	I	have	to	live	to	see	this	day,’
he	 thought	 bitterly.	 Bhishma	 could	 feel	 Vidhura’s	 comforting	 presence.	 Who
knew,	perhaps	even	Vidhura	would	turn	against	him	one	day.
With	 sudden	 energy,	 he	 pushed	 away	 Vidhura	 and	 stood	 erect.	 Although	 his
eyes	glistened	with	unshed	tears,	he	was	the	Grand	Regent	of	the	Kurus	once
again.	 He	 turned	 to	 Suyodhana	 and	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 took	 a	 step	 back.	 But
Karna	 stood	 his	 ground,	 putting	 himself	 between	 Suyodhana	 and	 the	 Grand
Regent.
“Move	away,	Suta,	I	have	something	to	say	to	my	grand-nephew.”
Karna	 and	 Bhishma	 stared	 at	 each	 other.	 It	 was	 Karna	 who	 looked	 away	 and
stepped	back	to	stand	behind	Suyodhana.
“Suyodhana,	foolish	son,	you	think	you	can	make	me	feel	guilty	and	I	will	toe
the	line?	You	think	this	Suta	can	fight	and	win	against	Parashurama?	Ha!	I	am
still	the	only	man	equal	to	Parashurama.”
“Karna	will	fight	Parashurama	and	he	will	win,”	Suyodhana	stated	calmly.
Bhishma	 stared	 at	 him	 and	 then	 broke	 into	 bitter	 laughter,	 his	 body	 shaking
with	 contemptuous	 mirth.	 “You	 say	 a	 Suta	 is	 going	 to	 win	 where	 I	 failed?
Suyodhana,	I	have	never	gambled	in	my	life	but	today	I	will.	Let	this	Suta	come
back	 alive,	 I	 do	 not	 even	 say	 he	 has	 to	 win,	 just	 let	 him	 return	 alive,	 and	 I
promise	I	will	step	down	as	Grand	Regent.”
Suyodhana	bowed	to	Bhishma	and	walked	out	of	the	chamber.	Karna	looked	at
the	mighty	warrior	before	him,	then	kneeled	and	touched	the	floor	at	his	feet.
Raising	his	hand	to	his	head	in	obeisance,	he	rose	gracefully	and	walked	away.
The	door	closed.	Vidhura	withdrew	with	quiet	steps.
The	Grand	Regent	of	the	Kurus	collapsed	on	his	spartan	bed.	Why	had	he	not
stopped	 Shakuni?	 His	 eyes	 became	 misty	 when	 he	 remembered	 the	 bloodsoaked	 five-year-old	 he	 had	 carried	 from	 Gandhara	 so	 many	 years	 before.
There	 was	 no	 end	 to	 man’s	 selfishness.	 Suyodhana,	 Yudhishtra,	 Shakuni,

everyone	 had	 betrayed	 him.	 He	 had	 always	 tried	 to	 act	 with	 noble	 resolve,
never	allowing	selfishness	to	cloud	his	judgement	even	for	a	minute.
A	 strange	 fear	 gripped	 him.	 Would	 he	 stand	 ruined	 by	 a	 Suta?	 He	 tried	 to
ignore	 it.	 It	 was	 not	 the	 fear	 of	 his	 country	 disintegrating	 but	 of	 the	 Suta
winning,	 where	 he,	 the	 illustrious	 warrior	 of	 the	 Kurus,	 the	 Kshatriya	 of
Kshatriyas,	had	failed,	which	filled	his	heart	now.
Below	his	windows	he	could	hear	Karna’s	army	getting	ready	to	march	South.
The	 Grand	 Regent	 sighed.	 Disaster	 loomed	 over	 Hastinapura;	 the	 country	 he
had	 built	 with	 his	 blood	 and	 sweat	 would	 disintegrate.	 From	 where	 had	 that
accursed	 Suta	 come	 into	 Suyodhana’s	 life?	 As	 slumber	 refused	 to	 close	 his
eyes,	the	prayer	that	lay	like	a	barb	in	his	heart	was,	‘May	the	Suta	die...’
Suddenly	 Bhishma	 remembered	 Krishna.	 Had	 the	 wily	 Yadava	 been	 with
Yudhishtra,	 the	 boy	 would	 not	 have	 committed	 such	 blunders.	 He	 might	 not
even	have	accepted	the	invitation	to	the	game	of	dice.	As	sleep	finlly	spread	its
mantle	over	him,	Bhishma	wondered	where	the	Yadava	had	vanished.
***
Unknown	 to	 Bhishma,	 Krishna	 was	 facing	 grave	 danger	 in	 the	 unforgiving
desert,	on	his	way	to	Dwaraka.	He	had	halted	a	few	feet	from	where	Takshaka
lay	in	wait.	Every	instinct	in	his	body	cried	out	to	him	not	to	proceed	further.
He	 pulled	 at	 the	 reins	 of	 his	 horse	 and	 barked	 at	 his	 followers	 to	 halt.	 The
cavalry	 ranks	 rippled	 like	 a	 whip	 at	 the	 sudden	 stoppage	 as	 the	 soldiers	 tried
deperately	to	control	their	whining	and	stamping	mounts.	The	smell	of	horse
dung	and	urine	soon	filled	the	air.	Krishna	dismounted	and	examined	the	sand.
There	were	many	footprints,	more	than	there	should	have	been	in	this	desolate
place	 of	 shifting	 sand	 dunes	 and	 bushy	 shrubs.	 He	 could	 see	 a	 cluster	 of
boulders	 in	 the	 distance.	 How	 many	 men	 could	 hide	 there?	 Whoever	 had
selected	it	as	an	ambush	spot,	knew	his	job.	Could	it	be	Takshaka	or	Vasuki?
From	behind	the	rocks,	the	eyes	of	the	Nagas	watched	the	Yadava	army,	their
arrows	ready	in	their	bows.
*****

5			GANDHARA	BECKONS
	
THE	 FRIENDS	 STOOD	 HUDDLED	 TOGETHER	 in	 the	 final	 moment	 of	 parting.	 Their

pain	 was	 too	 great	 to	 be	 allayed	 by	 words.	 Karna	 hugged	 each	 one	 in	 turn.
Aswathama	 watched	 quietly	 as	 his	 friend	 stood	 in	 silent	 prayer,	 facing	 east,
though	it	was	too	early	for	the	sky	to	have	lost	her	cloak	of	darkness.
Mounting	his	horse,	Karna	blew	his	conch	as	a	signal	to	move	out.	The	ranks
of	 armed	 men	 jerked	 like	 a	 giant	 reptile	 awakening	 from	 sleep.	 They	 soon
broke	 into	 a	 trot	 and	 in	 a	 few	 moments	 vanished	 in	 a	 cloud	 of	 dust,	 leaving
only	the	odour	of	horse	and	elephant	dung.
A	 vast	 emptiness	 filled	 Aswathama’s	 mind	 and	 heart.	 ‘Karna,	 will	 I	 ever	 see
you	again?’	he	wondered	as	he	swished	his	sword	at	a	bush.	Leaves	fell	around
him,	 mutilated.	 He	 turned	 towards	 Suyodhana,	 a	 question	 on	 his	 lips,	 but
stopped	when	he	saw	the	expression	on	his	friend’s	face.	In	the	pale	moonlight
he	could	see	tears	glistening	in	Suyodhana’s	eyes,	their	usual	burning	intensity
quenched.	 ‘Karna,	 if	 you	 do	 not	 return,	 how	 will	 we	 bear	 it?	 How	 will
Suyodhana	 go	 on?’	 Aswathama	 felt	 tears	 fill	 his	 own	 eyes.	 No,	 it	 was	 not
jealousy.	‘I	cannot	be	jealous	of	my	best	friend	going	to	war.’	He	swished	his
sword	again,	lacerating	a	shrub,	but	the	feeling	remained.
Jayadratha	had	moved	his	pieces	carefully.	He	had	not	bothered	to	ask	his	men
whether	they	were	ready	to	face	the	might	of	the	Confederate.	They	were	on	his
payroll	and	it	was	their	dharma	to	die	for	him.	But	he	had	asked	Suyodhana	for
one	 thing	 in	 return	for	 his	men	–	the	promise	that	in	the	event	of	Suyodhana
leaving	 Hastinapura	for	any	reason,	he	would	be	made	Regent	Crown	Prince
for	the	period.	He	had	mitigated	the	absurdity	of	his	demand	by	saying	it	was
his	 sister	 Sushala’s	 wish.	 When	 Aswathama	 had	 protested,	 Suyodhana	 had
dismissed	 his	 fears	 and	 promised	 Jayadratha	 that	 his	 sister ’s	 whim	 would	 be
satisfied	if	the	occasion	arose.	Satisfied	with	the	bargain,	Jayadratha	had	stood
away	 from	 the	 three	 friends,	 watching	 their	 sentimental	 parting	 with

contemptuous	 amusement.	 Now,	 as	 the	 night	 grew	 gray	 with	 age,	 Jayadratha,
standing	 lost	 in	 his	 own	 thoughts,	 felt	 weary.	 “My	 men	 have	 marched	 off	 to
face	 their	 destinies,	 yet	 I	 remain	 standing	 here.	 But	 the	 time	 will	 come,	 my
friends,	when	we	too,	must	march.”	So	saying,	he	walked	off,	the	first	hint	of
day	touching	his	shadowy	form.
Birds	 had	 started	 their	 hurried	 chatter	 in	 the	 bushes	 and	 the	 blades	 of	 grass
were	turning	saffron	at	their	tips.	A	myna	fluttered	its	little	wings	and	landed
nearby,	looked	at	them	and	flew	away.	A	single	myna,	an	ill	omen;	Suyodhana
tried	to	push	away	thoughts	of	death	and	prayed	Karna	would	return	victorious.
The	two	friends	stood	in	silence,	their	emotions	too	deep	for	words.
“I	 wish	 to	 go	 to	 Gandhara	 and	 bring	 back	 that	 son	 of	 a	 bitch,”	 Aswathama
finally	 said,	 and	 waited	 for	 Suyodhana’s	 response.	 But	 the	 Prince	 continued
gazing	 in	 the	 direction	 Karna	 had	 vanished.	 “Suyodhana?	 I	 am	 going	 to
Gandhara.	I	need	an	army	right	away.”	Silence	greeted	his	words.	‘Doesn’t	he
even	care?	I	was	his	childhood	friend	long	before	he	met	Karna.’	Heart	sore,
Aswathama	turned	to	leave.
Suyodhana	 grabbed	 his	 friend’s	 hand.	 “You	 too	 want	 to	 leave	 me	 alone,
Aswathama?”
The	 Brahmin	 swallowed	 hard	 and	 licked	 his	 dry	 lips.	 After	 a	 long	 pause,	 he
said,	“I	want	to	get	that	devil,	Suyodhana.	I	must	go	to	Gandhara.	Allow	me	to
do	so.	Give	me	some	men	so	I	can	flush	out	Shakuni	and	Durjaya	from	their
caves.”
“There	 are	 no	 men	 for	 Suyodhana,	 Aswathama.	 I	 am	 the	 pariah,	 the
untouchable.	If	Karna	loses,	I	will	remain	so	and	the	kingdom	will	go	to	that
self-righteous	 Yudhishtra.	 The	 Grand	 Regent	 will	 see	 to	 it.	 The	 alternative	 is
even	worse.	If	by	some	miracle	Karna	wins,	I	will	be	known	as	the	ingrate	who
forced	the	Pitamaha	to	resign.”
Aswathama	 remained	 silent.	 ‘What	 am	 I	 in	 the	 larger	 order	 of	 things?	 The
court	 jester?	 The	 affable	 and	 witty	 Brahmin	 who	 appears	 in	 stories	 and	 folk
tales?	 The	 funny	 clown,	 the	 side-kick	 of	 the	 hero?	 All	 my	 life	 my	 father	 has
stifled	 my	 growth,	 and	 now	 my	 friend	 is	 doing	 the	 same	 thing.	 I	 am	 a	 better
warrior	 than	 either	 Arjuna	 or	 Karna.	 Karna	 the	 hero	 was	 born	 the	 day	 the

princes	graduated.	They	showed	their	prowess	and	the	crowd	adored	them	all.
My	 father	 basked	 in	 the	 glory	 of	 his	 students,	 until	 Karna	 came	 and	 spoilt
everything.	 They	 are	 all	 part	 of	 the	 legend	 now,	 but	 no	 one	 remembers
Aswathama.	 I	 was	 just	 the	 priest	 who	 mumbled	 the	 mantras	 at	 a	 Suta’s
coronation.’	Aswathama	kicked	a	pebble	in	disgust.	He	turned	his	back,	lest	the
Prince	read	his	mind.
“Aswathama?	 You	 too	 want	 to	 leave	 me	 and	 go	 in	 search	 of	 danger?”
Suyodhana	asked,	placing	a	hand	on	Aswathama’s	shoulder.	“Why	can	we	not
go	together	in	search	of	my	uncle?”
Aswathama	shook	his	head.
“I	 wish	 you	 all	 success,	 my	 friend,	 but	 I	 have	 no	 men	 to	 spare.	 Nor	 can	 I	 go
with	you	to	share	in	the	glory.	It	is	your	journey.	Go,	Aswathama,	if	you	want
to,	though	it	breaks	my	heart	to	say	so.	Who	else	will	I	lose	today?”	Suyodhana
looked	up	at	the	fingers	of	dawn	stretching	across	the	sky.
“I	am	sorry,	Prince,	but	I	have	to	go	to	prove	myself,”	Aswathama	managed	to
say.
Suyodhana	 looked	 around.	 The	 Captain	 and	 his	 group	 of	 soldiers,	 who	 had
come	 to	 arrest	 Karna	 a	 few	 hours	 ago,	 were	 huddled	 near	 the	 fort	 gate.	 He
called	 to	 them	 and	 the	 Captain	 immediately	 ran	 up	 and	 bowed	 to	 the	 Crown
Prince.	 His	 soldiers	 ran	 up	 behind	 him.	 There	 were	 about	 sixty	 men.	 When
Suyodhana	asked	for	volunteers,	they	hesitated.	But	when	the	Prince	appealed
to	 their	 duty	 to	 the	 motherland,	 thirty-five	 of	 them,	 and	 Captain	 Mahaveera,
volunteered	to	accompany	Aswathama	on	his	dangerous	mission.
Aswathama	 felt	 a	 pang	 of	 guilt.	 Why	 was	 he	 doing	 this?	 Why	 was	 he	 taking
these	men	to	their	certain	deaths?	For	what?	Ego?
As	though	reading	his	mind,	Suyodhana	said,	“Aswathama,	I	have	done	what	I
can.	 Some,	 or	 perhaps	 all	 of	 them,	 will	 die,	 but	 they	 are	 going	 with	 you
because	they	love	their	country	more	than	their	lives.	I	am	sure	you	will	be	a
worthy	leader.”
“Suyodhana,	 among	 all	 your	 friends,	 I	 am	 the	 only	 one	 who	 has	 not	 earned

your	friendship.	Allow	me	to	do	so.”
“You	 talk	 nonsense,	 my	 friend,”	 Suyodhana	 said,	 embracing	 Aswathama	 one
last	time.	“Aswathama,	I	should	not	ask	this	of	you,	yet	I	must.	If	you	see	my
Uncle	 Shakuni,	 spare	 his	 life.	 I	 want	 to	 look	 into	 his	 face	 and	 ask	 him	 some
questions	before	I	decide	what	to	do	with	him.”
‘What	the...’	Aswathama	pulled	away	from	Suyodhana,	shocked	at	the	request.	It
would	take	all	his	self-control	not	to	kill	that	Mlecha	if	he	chanced	upon	him.
The	Crown	Prince	had	already	started	walking	towards	the	palace.	Aswathama
did	not	have	the	heart	to	tell	him	what	he	thought	of	Shakuni.	Instead,	he	turned
to	 the	 Captain.	 “We	 will	 assemble	 here	 in	 an	 hour.	 Let	 the	 men	 say	 their
farewells	to	their	families.”
“Sir.”
Aswathama	hurried	home,	ignoring	the	comments	of	some	of	the	soldiers	that
their	 families	 lived	 in	 distant	 villages.	 He	 hated	 to	 hear	 about	 their	 poor
relations,	who	waited	for	the	small	amounts	the	soldiers	sent	back	once	a	year.
He	 could	 not	 bear	 to	 hear	 the	 stories	 of	 the	 young	 wives,	 old	 mothers,	 little
girls	and	boys,	who	would	be	waiting	for	them	to	come	home.	He	did	not	want
to	hear	about	their	peasant	fathers	who	hid	their	fears	by	boasting	about	their
sons.	 If	 he	 listened,	 he	 was	 afraid	 he	 would	 never	 be	 able	 to	 take	 them	 to
Gandhara	with	him.
When	he	reached	home	it	was	already	dawn.	He	went	to	the	well,	drew	water,
and	 poured	 it	 over	 his	 head,	 enjoying	 the	 slithering	 cold	 as	 the	 water	 rushed
down	his	body.	A	breeze	caressed	him	with	its	ticklish	fingers	and	he	shivered
with	 joy.	 It	 was	 going	 to	 be	 very	 cold	 in	 Gandhara,	 so	 cold	 that	 it	 snowed.
Snow!	 How	 would	 it	 look	 and	 feel?	 He	 had	 never	 seen	 such	 a	 cold	 country.
How	did	people	survive	there?	He	smiled	to	himself,	trying	not	to	think	of	the
fate	 of	 the	 soldiers	 waiting	 for	 him.	 No,	 it	 would	 be	 a	 grand	 adventure.
“Shakuni,	I	am	coming	for	you,	Mlecha!”	he	said	aloud	as	he	ran	towards	his
room	to	dress.
His	mother	was	drawing	rangoli	patterns	in	the	courtyard,	her	fingertips	white
with	rice	powder.	He	could	hear	the	tinkle	of	a	bell	from	the	prayer	room	–	his

father	 would	 be	 at	 his	 puja.	 Aswathama	 stopped	 near	 his	 mother,	 the	 water
dripping	 from	 his	 body	 making	 patterns	 on	 the	 cow	 dung	 floor.	 His	 mother
looked	up.	Her	lips	were	set	together	and	he	could	sense	her	anger.	He	knew
she	 was	 angered	 by	 what	 had	 happened	 in	 the	 Sabha.	 He	 felt	 ashamed	 and
shifted	his	feet,	bracing	to	face	her	words.	But	she	said	nothing,	merely	looked
at	 him	 and	 pushed	 away	 the	 strand	 of	 hair	 that	 had	 fallen	 onto	 her	 forehead
with	 the	 back	 of	 her	 hand.	 He	 wanted	 to	 reach	 out	 and	 dust	 the	 white	 rice
powder	from	her	hair	–	or	was	it	age	that	had	made	her	hair	grey?
“Ma,	I	am	going	to	Gandhara.”
The	bowl	of	rice	powder	fell	from	his	mother ’s	hand,	covering	the	beautiful
patterns	on	the	floor.	The	rangoli	blurred	as	Aswathama	felt	tears	sting	his	eyes
and	his	chest	tighten	with	a	pain	that	had	no	name.	He	fell	at	his	mother ’s	feet,
not	wanting	to	face	her.	“Ma,	give	me	your	blessing	before	I	go.”
He	could	feel	her	hands	on	his	hair.	Her	shaking	fingers	ran	over	his	face	and	a
few	 tears	 fell	 on	 his	 shoulder.	 But	 he	 did	 not	 answer	 her	 frantic	 questions,
afraid	of	his	answers.	He	ran	to	his	room	and	gathered	his	weapons.	Swords,
bows,	quiver	of	arrows,	dagger	–	he	bundled	them	with	some	clothes.	Then	he
donned	his	armour	and	walked	out.
His	 father	 was	 still	 in	 the	 puja	 room;	 his	 mother	 sat	 beside	 him,	 her	 eyes
closed.	Aswathama	dropped	his	bundle	on	the	floor	and	walked	up	to	them.	The
dancing	figure	of	Shiva	stared	back	at	him,	magnificent	in	its	poise	and	grace.
Aswathama	fell	to	the	floor	in	obeisance,	his	hands	folded	over	his	head.	The
familiar	aroma	of	incense	and	camphor	almost	made	him	cry.	It	was	the	smell
of	his	childhood.	He	had	sat	with	his	father	and	learned	the	mantras	from	him.
How	he	had	resented	it	then,	wanting	only	to	dash	out	to	play	with	his	friends.
Now	 he	 yearned	 for	 those	 days	 to	 return.	 His	 mother	 had	 not	 spoken	 a	 word
after	her	first	flood	of	questions.	He	touched	her	feet	in	pranaam,	but	she	did
not	 stir.	 His	 father	 sat	 cross-legged	 in	 meditation,	 his	 face	 serene	 and	 calm.
Aswathama	 touched	 his	 father ’s	 feet.	 ‘Bless	 me,	 father.	 I	 am	 going	 to
Gandhara,’	he	said	in	his	mind.	Surely,	his	father	would	say	something	to	him,
bless	him	and	wish	him	success?	Would	he	have	behaved	this	way	if	he	were
Arjuna?
But	 Drona	 did	 not	 move.	 ‘Enough	 of	 this!’	 Aswathama	 thought	 sternly	 as	 he

picked	up	his	bundle	and	left	the	room.	He	lingered	at	the	threshold,	running
his	 fingers	 over	 the	 doorframe.	 He	 might	 never	 see	 his	 home	 again.	 The
swords	in	his	bundle	rattled.
His	mother	came	rushing	out.	Her	muffled	sobs	pierced	his	heart.	But	it	was	his
father ’s	voice	that	almost	made	him	turn	back.	“Stop	crying,	woman.	Nothing
will	happen	to	him.	He	is	the	greatest	warrior	I	have	ever	known.	He	is	Drona’s
son.”
Aswathama	wanted	to	throw	down	his	bundle	and	rush	to	hug	his	father	as	he
had	 done	 as	 a	 child.	 ‘Father,	 do	 you	 truly	 mean	 it?	 Am	 I	 better	 than	 your
Arjuna?’	He	wanted	to	feel	his	father ’s	hands	on	his	head	in	blessing.	Suddenly
the	wish	to	go	anywhere	vanished.	He	wanted	to	remain	in	Hastinapura	as	his
father ’s	 son.	 But	 the	 smiling	 face	 of	 Shakuni	 rose	 before	 his	 eyes	 and	 the
young	Brahmin	raised	his	bowed	head.	‘Father,	if	I	return	alive,	I	hope	I	will
have	the	courage	to	tell	you	what	I	feel	–	that	no	son	has	ever	loved	his	father
more	than	Aswathama.	But	for	now…Gandhara	is	waiting.’
***
Though	 Shakuni	 had	 travelled	 many	 yojanas,	 he	 could	 still	 feel	 the	 burning
eyes	 of	 the	 Brahmin	 boring	 into	 his	 back.	 The	 wind	 was	 howling	 in	 his	 ears
and	the	horse	frothing	at	the	mouth,	yet	he	kept	urging	greater	speed.	He	knew
Aswathama	 would	 come	 after	 him.	 He	 could	 feel	 it	 in	 his	 bones.	 His	 heart
thudded	louder	than	the	sound	of	his	horse’s	hooves.
When	 his	 mount	 finally	 jumped	 over	 some	 bushes	 and	 flew	 into	 Gandhara,
Shakuni	punched	his	chest.	‘Aswathama,	we	will	arrange	a	welcome	feast	for
you.	Welcome	to	Gandhara,	Brahmin!’
*****

6			DARKNESS
	
“BHANU!”	THE	VOICE	SOUNDED	OVERWROUGHT,	like	that	of	a	tired	man	recovering

from	sickness.
Bhanumati	 pulled	 the	 quilt	 over	 her	 sleeping	 daughter.	 ‘Why	 did	 he	 do	 it?
Suyodhana,	I	cannot	look	at	you.’	How	she	despised	him	for	what	he	had	done.
The	breeze	carried	in	the	sweet	scent	of	parijat	flowers.	‘Why	doesn’t	he	just
come	 in,	 instead	 of	 calling	 out	 like	 a	 dying	 man?’	 she	 thought.	 Had	 he	 gone
away?	How	could	he	go	leaving	her	like	this?
Silence	surrounded	her.	Unable	to	bear	it	a	moment	longer,	Bhanumati	tread	on
noiseless	feet	to	the	door	and	yanked	it	open.	She	saw	a	shadow	in	the	gloom
of	the	corridor.	She	approached	him,	afraid	her	determination	to	hate	him	all
her	life	would	melt	if	she	looked	into	his	eyes.	His	shallow	breathing	stopped
altogether	as	he	sensed	her	presence.	She	wanted	to	touch	him	but	withdrew	her
hand	at	the	last	moment.
“Bhanu,	I	did	nothing	wrong,”	he	said	beseechingly.
Bhanumati	 withdrew	 in	 horror.	 “Nothing	 wrong?	 What	 are	 you	 saying,	 my
husband?”
“She	 deserved	 it.	 That	 woman	 deserved	 every	 bit	 of	 it.”	 The	 low	 whisper
scorched	her	ears.	Forgetting	to	breathe,	she	stood	still,	waiting	for	him	to	say
something	that	would	make	her	believe	in	his	remorse.
“Why	do	you	stare	at	me	like	that,	Bhanu?	Tell	me	you	understand.	Was	it	so
wrong	to	pay	her	back	in	her	own	coin?	It	was	her	husband,	not	I,	who	pledged
her	in	the	game	of	dice.”	Suyodhana	punched	his	fist	into	a	pillar.	Bhanumati
flinched;	that	must	have	hurt.	She	stood	in	silence.
“Tell	me	something,	woman.	Why	do	you	gape	at	me	like	an	idiot?	I	will	teach

them	 a	 lesson	 –	 those	 five	 villains	 and	 their	 arrogant	 wife.	 Bastards!”
Suyodhana	spoke	rapidly.
Bhanumati	 had	 heard	 enough.	 There	 was	 really	 no	 point	 talking	 to	 him
anymore.
“Bhanu,	 where	 are	 you	 going?”	 Suyodhana	 grabbed	 her	 arm	 and	 jerked	 her
back,	 peering	 into	 her	 eyes.	 She	 stared	 back,	 willing	 her	 tears	 to	 remain
unshed.	“Am	I	so	evil,	Bhanu?”
She	 heard	 his	 voice	 crack.	 When	 his	 arms	 embraced	 her	 she	 forgot	 every
retort	 she	 had	 planned,	 the	 words	 she	 had	 rehearsed.	 She	 lifted	 his	 chin	 and
looked	 into	 his	 eyes.	 Moonlight	 glistened	 in	 their	 tormented	 depths.	 ‘Perhaps
the	rest	of	the	world	sees	him	as	evil	but	for	me	there	is	no	one	nobler,’	she
thought.
He	pressed	his	lips	to	hers	and	she	tasted	the	saltiness	of	his	tears	on	her	lips.	It
did	not	last.	The	threatening	face	of	Draupadi	grew	to	fill	the	sky!	The	voice	of
the	shamed	woman	filled	the	palace.	Bhanumati	pulled	away	from	Suyodhana’s
embrace	and	ran	to	her	bed,	hands	over	her	ears	to	block	out	the	sound.
Suyodhana	 came	 to	 her	 and	 cradled	 her	 head	 on	 his	 shoulder.	 His	 arms
enfolded	 her	 as	 he	 spoke	 soothingly.	 Soon	 she	 was	 soaked	 in	 the	 fuzzy
happiness	of	having	her	head	on	his	shoulder.	She	wanted	to	remain	thus	until
pralaya	 claimed	 the	 world.	 In	 the	 east,	 the	 sky	 blossomed	 like	 a	 hibiscus
flower.
Her	husband	shattered	the	moment	by	reopening	the	wound.	She	looked	at	him
in	fear	as	he	told	her	how	he	had	stood	up	to	Bhishma	for	Karna’s	sake.	‘Why
did	he	do	that?’	she	wondered	as	her	heart	beat	like	the	drums	of	war.
“Now	 my	 friends	 have	 all	 gone,	 Bhanu.	 I	 feel	 alone.	 Perhaps	 I	 should	 have
gone	with	Karna	to	meet	the	fanatics	of	the	Confederate	or	with	Aswathama	to
Gandhara.	Why	do	I	feel	like	a	coward?	Why	am	I	so	miserable,	Bhanu?”
“It	 is	 their	 duty	 to	 protect	 the	 country,	 Suyodhana.”	 She	 hated	 herself	 for	 the
envy	 bubbling	 inside	 her	 against	 her	 husband’s	 friends.	 The	 first	 rays	 of	 the
sun	 had	 started	 sneaking	 in	 through	 the	 silk	 curtains	 and	 she	 could	 hear	 the

sounds	 of	 servants	 cleaning	 the	 corridors	 and	 gardeners	 raking	 leaves	 in	 the
garden.	The	world	went	on,	not	caring	a	damn	about	who	died	and	who	lived,
who	was	shamed	and	who	was	honoured.	The	silence	in	her	room	was	stifling.
He	had	not	answered	her.
“Bhanu,	have	I	failed	Karna?	Have	I	sacrificed	Aswathama?”
‘Karna!	He	is	the	one	who	has	changed	my	husband!’	Bhanumati	clenched	her
fists.	 Why	 was	 he	 so	 important	 to	 him?	 More	 than	 Pitamaha,	 more	 than	 her.
Something	 jarred	 in	 her	 mind	 whenever	 she	 thought	 of	 the	 Suta,	 noble	 and
righteous	though	he	was.	‘Perhaps	it	is	Karna’s	almost	inhuman	righteousness
and	generosity	that	frightens	me,’	she	thought.
As	 if	 reading	 her	 mind,	 Suyodhana	 stood	 up.	 He	 drew	 aside	 the	 silk	 curtains
and	stood	with	his	hands	gripping	the	window	frame.	The	sun	was	rising	over
the	Ganga,	turning	her	waters	into	a	sheet	of	gold.	The	fresh	morning	breeze
carried	the	smell	of	blossoms,	the	chirping	of	birds	and	the	faint	shouts	of	the
boatmen.	 “Bhanu,	 see	 the	 sun	 in	 his	 divine	 glory.	 I	 can	 see	 the	 face	 of	 Karna
there.”	 He	 turned	 back	 to	 Bhanumati,	 his	 hair	 fluttering	 in	 the	 breeze.	 “It	 is	 a
new	day,	the	dawn	of	a	golden	future.”
She	 did	 not	 reply	 but	 her	 hands	 felt	 stiff.	 If	 Karna	 died	 in	 the	 war	 with	 the
Confederate,	she	would	get	her	husband	back,	for	herself.	She	shuddered	at	the
thought	that	singed	her	soul.	‘Oh	God,	it	is	a	sin	to	even	think	like	that.	Karna,
of	all	people!	Forgive	me,	oh	Shiva!’
“I	am	sure	they	will	return,	Bhanu.	Both	of	them	will	be	back.	I	have	thirteen
years	 to	prove	myself.	Do	not	let	this	foolish	incident	with	Draupadi	and	her
husbands	stand	in	the	way	of	our	happiness.	I	have	no	regrets.	That	woman	and
her	 husbands	 deserved	 it.	 May	 they	 never	 return.	 I	 am	 determined	 to	 create	 a
world	 where	 no	 one	 is	 miserable,	 where	 a	 ruler	 can	 rule	 without
discriminating;	create	a	country	where	nobody	goes	hungry	to	bed	and	the	law
is	equal	for	men	and	women,	rich	and	poor	alike.	I	need	my	friends	with	me
and	 they	 know	 it.	 They	 will	 return	 and	 we	 will	 prove	 all	 this	 to	 the	 world.
Bhanu,	our	kingdom	will	not	deny	men	like	Karna	what	is	due	to	them	because
of	caste,	or	be	cruel	to	Nishadas	and	untouchables.	I	want	to	get	into	the	cause
of	the	Naga	problem	and	resolve	it.	I	want	to	do	a	hundred	thousand	things.	I
want	 the	 whole	 world	 to	 love	 me	 for	 my	 fairness;	 I	 want	 to	 be	 known	 as	 a

righteous	man	who	did	not	care	for	caste,	who	gave	Karna,	the	noblest	man	of
all,	 his	 life.	 I	 want	 my	 people	 to	 think	 there	 is	 no	 one	 better	 than	 Suyodhana.
They	 will	 not	 hate	 me	 for	 what	 I	 did	 to	 that	 woman.	 There	 is	 no	 one	 who
deserves	the	throne	more	than	I.	It	is	a	new	day,	a	new	beginning.”
Bhanumati	looked	at	him	in	surprise.	He	had	spoken	of	his	dreams	many	times
before	 but	 something	 was	 different	 now.	 Something	 was	 unfamiliar,	 as	 if	 the
window	 to	 the	 darkest	 place	 in	 Suyodhana’s	 mind	 had	 opened	 and	 light	 was
falling	on	the	dust	in	the	corners.	She	felt	she	understood	him	now	but	wished
she	did	not.	Even	his	love	for	Karna	was	a	reflection	of	his	love	for	himself,
his	love	for	glory	and	fame.	How	then	was	he	different	from	the	Pandavas	he
hated?	 Was	 there	 a	 Yudhishtra	 hidden	 inside	 Suyodhana	 and	 vice	 versa?	 Was
Duryodhana	taking	over	Suyodhana?
“You	are	no	different	from	Yudhishtra,”	she	said.	Her	hands	flew	to	her	mouth
as	if	to	stop	the	spoken	words.
Suyodhana’s	head	snapped	towards	her	in	shock	and	anger.	She	wanted	to	look
away	but	knew	this	was	a	decisive	moment	in	her	life.	He	walked	to	the	door.	“I
cannot	forgive	or	forget	that,”	he	said.
“You	cannot	forgive	me?”	Bhanumati	said,	her	voice	choking	with	sobs.	“It	is
you	who	should	be	asking	for	forgiveness,	Suyodhana,	for	the	way	you	treated
Draupadi,	not	me.”
“Enough,	 woman!	 You	 are	 my	 wife.	 Do	 not	 forget	 your	 place.	 I	 have	 done
nothing	wrong.	I	am	a	Kshatriya.”
“Kshatriya!	 When	 has	 disrobing	 women	 become	 a	 Kshatriya	 trait?	 You	 talk
about	a	caste-free	society,	yet	stand	on	Kshatriya	pride.”	“She	insulted	Karna!”
thundered	Suyodhana.
“Oh,	forget	Karna.	You	and	your	friends!	May	the	Suta	never	return	from	his
war	with	the	Southern	Confederate!	May	the	Brahmin	die	in	Gandhara!”
Suyodhana	rushed	towards	Bhanumati.	Grabbing	her	hair,	 he	 pulled	 back	her
head.	She	saw	murder	in	his	eyes.
With	 a	 calm	 voice	 that	 made	 Suyodhana	 weak	 in	 the	 knees,	 she	 said,	 “Do	 it,

Suyodhana.	Kill	me.	It	will	not	change	the	fact	that	what	you	did	was	wrong.”
The	grip	on	her	hair	loosened.	He	turned	away	from	her.	She	folded	her	hands
and	pleaded,	“Natha,	please.	Ask	for	her	forgiveness.	Give	your	cousins	their
due.	Be	the	husband	I	knew.	Please...”
Suyodhana	 stood	 towering	 over	 her,	 the	 white	 shawl	 over	 his	 shoulder
flapping	in	the	breeze.	The	small	lamp	in	the	corner	flickered,	throwing	light
and	shadow	over	his	face	in	crazy	patterns.	A	sudden	gust	snuffed	it	out	and	the
smell	of	the	burning	wick	filled	the	room.	In	the	golden	light	of	the	rising	sun
seeping	into	the	room,	Bhanumati	saw	his	face	and	all	hope	died.
***
Far	away	in	Dwaraka,	Ekalavya’s	army	had	surrounded	Krishna’s	city.	As	the
Nishada	 looked	 at	 the	 domes	 and	 spires	 of	 Dwaraka	 shining	 golden	 in	 the
sunshine,	 he	 clenched	 his	 teeth	 in	 seething	 anger.	 The	 prosperity	 of	 Dwaraka
was	 a	 sore	 sight	 when	 millions	 of	 Nishadas	 and	 Nagas	 lived	 no	 better	 than
animals.
When	 the	 fort	 gates	 opened	 and	 Balarama’s	 army	 rushed	 out	 to	 confront	 the
Nagas,	 Balarama	 was	 a	 worried	 man.	 He	 could	 feel	 the	 energy	 of	 Nishada’s
army	 and	 sense	 their	 bloodlust.	 If	 only	 he	 could	 reach	 Ekalavya	 before	 too
many	people	died	in	the	pointless	war,	he	might	be	able	to	convince	him	about
the	futility	of	all	this	violence.	He	could	not	capitulate	or	it	would	be	nothing
short	of	shameful	surrender.	As	the	King	of	the	Yadavas,	he	had	a	duty	to	lead
his	people	to	victory,	to	protect	them.	Fight	he	would,	but	if	there	was	a	way	to
achieve	a	truce	and	avoid	bloodshed,	he	would	find	that	way.
A	 cruel	 smile	 played	 on	 Ekalavya’s	 lips	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 Balarama’s	 army.
Victory	was	finally	going	to	be	his.	He	could	see	it	in	the	way	Balarama	held
his	 bow,	 the	 way	 he	 looked	 at	 his	 men,	 the	 lack	 of	 enthusiasm	 in	 the	 Yadava
war	 cries.	 Without	 Krishna	 for	 protection,	 Dwaraka	 was	 going	 to	 succumb
easily.	He	turned	to	his	companions.	“If	Balarama	offers	a	truce,	we	will	seem
to	accept	and	then	kill	him	once	we	enter	the	city.	We	will	burn	the	city,	kill	all
the	men	and	take	all	the	women.	Their	treasury	brims	with	the	wealth	they	have
grabbed	 by	 exploiting	 the	 downtrodden.	 We	 will	 distribute	 it	 among	 our
people.	“

Balarama	was	walking	into	a	trap.
*****

7			SERPENT	HUNT
	
TAKSHAKA	WAS	GETTING	IMPATIENT.	Why	had	Krishna’s	army	slowed	down?	Why

had	 the	 wily	 Yadava	 dismounted?	 Had	 he	 sensed	 the	 trap	 or	 was	 it	 just	 a
coincidence?	His	men	were	getting	restless.	A	gray	moon	shone	reluctantly	in
the	 sky.	He	 cocked	his	ear	 to	 listen	to	what	Krishna	was	saying	to	one	of	his
men.	The	breeze	was	unfavourable	and	he	could	not	hear	what	was	being	said.
One	of	the	Nagas	coughed	and	Takshaka’s	heart	skipped	a	beat.	Had	it	alerted
Krishna?	Had	he	heard?	He	hissed	at	his	men	to	be	silent.
***
“What	has	happened?”	asked	Kritavarma,	sitting	proudly	erect	on	his	horse.	He
was	 the	 Commander	 of	 the	 Narayana	 Sena,	 the	 famed	 elite	 corps	 of	 Yadava
warriors	 trained	 personally	 by	 Krishna.	 Kritavarma	 had	 once	 been	 a	 close
friend,	but	the	carnage	at	Indraprastha	had	caused	them	to	drift	apart.
“Let	us	halt	here.”
“Krishna,	are	you	mad?”	Kritavarma	asked,	surprised.
“I	 am	 tired	 and	 the	 boys,	 too,	 need	 a	 rest.”	 Krishna’s	 eyes	 never	 left	 the
boulders	 in	 the	 distance.	 ‘I	 should	 never	 have	 spared	 Vasuki	 when	 we	 caught
him	in	Indraprastha,’	he	thought.
“So	you	would	rather	halt	here	and	see	Dwaraka	reduced	to	rubble?	Why	are
we	wasting	time?”	Kritavarma	asked,	raising	his	voice.
“What	can	a	few	Nishadas	do	to	us?”	Krishna’s	heart	was	pounding	in	his	chest.
If	 only	 he	 could	 provoke	 the	 Commander,	 he	 might	 be	 able	 to	 pull	 off
something.	“I	have	seen	many	Nishadas	in	Khandiva;	they	ran	like	mice	before
a	cat	when	Arjuna	and	I...”

“Krishna!	 I	 do	 not	 wish	 to	 hear	 anything	 more	 concerning	 your	 disgraceful
conduct	in	Khandiva.”
“The	 Nagas	 are	 cowards.	 Why	 should	 a	 Nishada	 scare	 you,	 Kritavarma?	 We
should	have	stayed	in	Indraprastha	and	enjoyed	the	evening	instead.”
“Don’t	get	me	started	on	your	amoral	Pandava	friends!”
“Kritavarma,	 you	 only	 say	 that	 because	 my	 brother,	 Balarama,	 has	 an
inexplicable	fondness	for	Duryodhana.”
“I	get	it	now,	Krishna,	why	you	want	to	halt	in	this	wilderness.	You	are	aiming
at	the	throne	of	Dwaraka.	You	do	not	wish	to	save	our	Dwaraka	at	all!”
“My	brother	is	a	wonderful	man	but	not	the	leader	the	Yadavas	need	now.	It	is
better	 that	 he	 be	 defeated.	 The	 Yadavas	 can	 then	 elect	 a	 fit	 person	 as	 King,
someone	who	can...”
Krishna	 felt	 the	 cold	 tip	 of	 Kritavarma’s	 sword	 on	 his	 neck.	 “Another	 word
about	Balarama	and	you	are	dead.”
Krishna	tried	hard	to	suppress	a	smile.	Kritavarma	had	taken	the	bait.	Krishna
tugged	 at	 the	 reins	 of	 Kritavarma’s	 horse	 and	 it	 plunged	 forward	 in	 pain,
throwing	Kritavarma	to	the	ground.	Krishna	laughed,	hoping	to	provoke	him
further.
Had	a	head	popped	up	in	the	distance?	It	was	dark,	with	only	a	few	sorry	stars
staring	 down	 from	 a	 bleak	 sky.	 When	 Kritavarma	 tried	 to	 get	 up,	 Krishna
kicked	him	and	laughed	again.	No	warrior	worth	his	salt	could	swallow	such
an	insult.	Kicking	a	fallen	man!	That	too,	a	reputed	warrior	like	Kritavarma!
“Draw	your	sword,	you...you...”	Kritavarma	stood	up,	stuttering	in	rage,	unable
to	spell	out	the	insult	that	frothed	in	his	mouth.
Krishna	walked	up	to	his	own	horse	and	took	down	his	sword.	He	took	his	time
removing	it	from	its	sheath	and	then	began	polishing	it	with	deliberate	strokes,
as	 if	 he	 had	 all	 the	 time	 in	 the	 world.	 His	 eyes	 never	 left	 the	 boulders	 in	 the
distance.	Another	head	popped	up	and	vanished	in	the	dark.	Krishna	slipped	his
barbed	discus	into	his	waistcloth	and	then	walked	towards	Kritavarma.	By	the

time	he	reached	his	Commander,	the	Narayana	Sena	had	split	into	two	factions
and	most	had	dismounted	from	their	horses.	One	group	bowed	to	him	and	he
acknowledged	 them.	 The	 other	 group	 stood	 behind	 Kritavarma,	 watching	 the
proceedings	with	hostility.
“Let	us	decide	the	rules	of	the	duel...”	Kritavarma	did	not	finish.
“Attack!”	barked	Krishna	to	his	supporters.
Kritavarma’s	mouth	opened	in	surprise.	They	had	not	even	agreed	on	the	rules
of	 combat,	 yet	 Krishna	 had	 ordered	 an	 attack	 on	 him!	 Before	 he	 could	 react,
men	were	running	towards	him	with	drawn	swords.
“Kill	 those	 unscrupulous	 Yadavas,”	 Kritavarma	 shouted,	 parrying	 a	 deadly
sword	swipe	with	his	own	blade.
His	followers	attacked	Krishna’s	men.	Soon,	what	should	have	been	a	civilized
duel,	turned	into	a	full-fledged	battle.	Krishna	kept	himself	to	the	periphery	of
the	 fighting	men,	far	from	the	enraged	Yadava	 Commander.	He	 kept	 taunting
Kritavarma	about	his	lineage	to	fan	his	outrage.	Men	began	dropping	dead	on
both	sides.	Limbs	were	severed	and	faces	gored.	There	was	blood	everywhere.
The	Yadavas	were	hacking	each	other	to	death.	Over	the	din	and	fierce	cries	of
battle,	 Krishna’s	 eyes	 kept	 searching	 for	 any	 movement	 from	 the	 hidden
enemy.	Nothing	stirred.	His	men	were	dying	in	a	battle	he	had	started.	Had	he
lost	the	gamble?
***
“Don’t	 move!”	 Vasuki	 hissed	 to	 Takshaka,	 but	 the	 Naga	 leader	 was	 getting
restless.	 The	 Yadavas	 were	 fighting	 each	 other	 to	 the	 death	 and	 this	 was	 the
most	opportune	moment	to	finish	off	the	notorious	Narayana	Sena,	as	well	as
Krishna	himself.	“That	cunning	Yadava	and	his	tricks!”	Vasuki	hissed	again.
‘Perhaps	 he	 is	 and	 perhaps	 he	 is	 not,’	 mused	 Takshaka.	 The	 Yadavas	 had
always	been	notorious	for	their	in-fighting	and	drinking.
“We	only	have	to	delay	them	enough	for	Ekalavya	to	take	Dwaraka.	Don’t	bat
an	eyelid.	Be	still.”	Desperation	sounded	in	Vasuki’s	voice.

‘Why	is	he	using	that	tone	with	me,	the	cranky	old	man?’	Like	a	thunderbolt,
the	answer	struck	Takshaka.	‘Wily	old	rascal!	He	knows	that	his	own	plan	of
making	Ekalavya	leader	of	the	Nagas	will	fail	if	I	get	Krishna.’
“Krishna	 is	 faking	 it.	 Stay	 here!”	 Vasuki	 cried	 as	 Takshaka	 rose	 from	 his
hiding	place.
‘If	 the	 cunning	 Yadava	 was	 faking	 the	 battle,	 would	 he	 allow	 his	 own	 elite
soldiers	to	die	like	this?’	Takshaka	wondered.	No,	it	was	real.
Vasuki	 grabbed	 Takshaka’s	 wrist	 in	 a	 last	 ditch	 attempt	 to	 stop	 him.	 The
revolutionary	 leader	 pulled	 his	 hand	 away	 with	 contemptuous	 ease.	 “Attack!”
he	shouted.
Screaming	 and	 yelling,	 the	 Nagas	 ran	 towards	 the	 Yadavas.	 They	 did	 not	 see
Vasuki	get	up	and	run	through	the	scrub	and	desert	as	fast	as	his	tired	old	legs
could	carry	him.	Neither	did	they	see	Krishna	who	was	no	longer	among	the
group	of	fighters	hacking	each	other	to	death.
***
At	 last!	 Krishna	 heaved	 a	 sigh	 of	 relief	 when	 he	 saw	 the	 Nagas	 leave	 their
hiding	place	and	rush	towards	them.	He	crouched	behind	the	carcass	of	one	of
the	slain	horses.	The	smell	of	death	hung	in	the	air.	Twenty	of	his	elite	soldiers
were	dead	and	many	others	wounded	in	the	in-fighting.
Takshaka	was	only	a	few	feet	from	Kritavarma	when	Krishna	rushed	from	his
hiding	 place	 towards	 them.	 Holding	 his	 Sudharshana	chakra	 in	 one	 hand,	 he
hacked	 his	 way	 through	 the	 melée	 with	 his	 sword	 in	 his	 other	 hand,	 not
bothering	 to	 see	 whether	 it	 was	 a	 Naga	 or	 Yadava	 he	 was	 cutting	 down.
Takshaka	 and	 Kritavarma	 were	 engaged	 in	 deadly	 swordplay.	 Krishna	 hurled
himself	 on	 the	 Naga	 leader.	 They	 fell	 to	 the	 ground,	 rolling	 over.	 In	 a	 trice
Krishna	 had	 prised	 Takshaka’s	 sword	 from	 his	 hand.	 When	 the	 dust	 settled,
Takshaka	was	on	his	knees	with	Krishna	standing	behind	him.	The	sharp	edge
of	the	Sudharshana	gleamed	against	the	dark	skin	of	Takshaka’s	throat.	There
was	an	angry	roar	from	the	Nagas	and	they	rushed	to	save	their	leader,	swords
and	lances	at	the	ready.

“Ask	your	men	to	drop	their	arms.”	Krishna’s	voice	was	calm.	A	smile	played
on	his	lips.
“Kill	 him!”	 Takshaka	 barked	 and	 a	 few	 Nagas	 stepped	 out,	 ready	 to	 strike
Krishna.
“Don’t	tempt	me,	Takshaka,”	Krishna	said	and	yanked	the	Naga	leader ’s	head
up	by	the	hair.	He	pressed	his	Sudharshana	harder	and	a	fine	red	line	appeared
on	 Takshaka’s	 throat.	 Drops	 of	 blood	 dripped	 onto	 the	 earth,	 making	 dark
blotches	where	Takshaka	knelt.	One	by	one,	the	Nagas	dropped	their	arms.
“Now	you	die,”	Krishna	said	without	emotion.
But	 before	 he	 could	 slit	 Takshaka’s	 throat,	 Kritavarma	 grabbed	 his	 hand	 and
tried	to	prise	away	the	Sudharshana.	“Krishna,	this	is	ignoble	and	unfair.	You
gave	your	word.”
“Kritavarma,	you	fool...	let	me	do	my	duty.”
Takshaka	 seized	 his	 opportunity	 as	 the	 Yadavas	 argued.	 He	 scooped	 up	 some
sand	 and	 threw	 it	 in	 Krishna’s	 face.	 The	 split	 second	 during	 which	 Krishna
loosened	 his	 grip	 was	 enough	 for	 Takshaka,	 who	 wrenched	 out	 of	 Krishna’s
grasp	and	fled	for	his	life.
“Catch	him!”	Krishna	yelled	in	frustration.	His	eyes	were	still	itching	from	the
sand	and	he	was	unable	to	see	clearly,	but	he	knew	the	Nagas	were	escaping.	By
the	time	his	sight	cleared,	all	the	important	Naga	rebels	had	gone.
“Satisfied	now?”	Krishna	asked	the	still	fuming	Kritavarma,	shaking	his	head
in	exasperation.
“Krishna,	 what	 you	 did	 was	 both	 dishonourable	 and	 deceitful.	 This	 is	 not	 the
warrior ’s	way…”
“My	 friend,	 an	 ambush	 was	 waiting	 for	 us.	 They	 would	 have	 slaughtered	 us
had	we	walked	into	it.	I	had	no	other	choice	but	to	provoke	you...”
“You	are	a	genius,	Sir,”	one	of	the	older	soldiers	cried.	“We	did	not	realise	it
was	part	of	your	plan.”

His	men	lauded	his	wisdom	as	Krishna	stood	basking	in	their	praise.	The	night
grew	old	and	streaks	of	grey	appeared	in	the	east.	If	only	Kritavarma	had	not
stopped	him	from	doing	his	duty.	Why	did	he	not	understand	this	was	war	and
there	 was	 nothing	 unfair	 about	 winning?	 But	 the	 Commander	 burned	 with
anger	and	humiliation.
“Come,	let	us	forget	this	and	go	on,	Kritavarma,”	Krishna	said,	extending	his
hand.
“Forget	what,	Krishna?	The	death	of	twenty	of	my	finest	boys?	What	will	I	say
to	their	families	when	I	return	to	Dwaraka?	You	feel	smug	that	you	have	saved
the	 majority.	 That	 is	 poor	 consolation	 for	 the	 families	 of	 the	 dead,	 killed	 by
their	 own	 comrades	 in	 arms.	 How	 will	 I	 face	 their	 widows?	 What	 a
dishonourable	victory!”
Krishna	sighed	as	he	looked	at	the	smoke	rising	from	the	funeral	pyres	built
for	the	dead	soldiers.	Then	he	turned	and	yelled	at	the	top	of	his	voice,	“Let	us
rush	to	Dwaraka,	my	friends.	There	is	no	time	to	lose.”
The	elite	cavalry	rapidly	fell	into	formation.	Krishna’s	horse	shot	forward	like
an	arrow	and	the	Narayana	Sena	galloped	behind	him.	They	rode	for	the	better
part	 of	 that	 day,	 stopping	 only	 to	 rest	 their	 horses	 and	 have	 a	 quick	 meal.
Krishna	 tried	 to	 make	 amends	 to	 Kritavarma,	 but	 the	 Commander	 refused	 to
speak.	By	evening,	they	had	reached	the	outskirts	of	Dwaraka.
“Oh	 my	 God!”	 Krishna	 cried	 in	 anguish.	 A	 huge	 army	 of	 Nishadas	 were
engaged	in	a	pitched	battle	with	Balarama’s	men.
“For	our	motherland,	for	Dwaraka,	and	for	Balarama...”	Kritavarma	raised	his
sword	 high	 in	 the	 air	 and	 rushed	 into	 battle.	 His	 men	 rode	 behind	 him	 with
daredevil	bravery.
Krishna	shook	his	head	in	dismay.	When	would	his	people	learn?	There	was	no
point	in	being	chivalrous	towards	enemies	who	attacked	an	undefended	city	or
waited	 in	 ambush.	 It	 was	 neither	 cruelty	 nor	 cowardice	 to	 beat	 them	 with
cunning	 and	 skill.	 In	 this	 game,	 there	 were	 no	 rules	 or	 laws;	 only	 winning
mattered.	The	man	who	was	fighting	so	nobly	would	have	been	the	first	person
to	break	the	rules	had	he	known	what	lay	in	store	for	him.	Krishna	felt	pity	stir

for	 Kritavarma,	 but	 he	 did	 not	 have	 the	 luxury	 to	 stand	 and	 watch	 them	 get
butchered	 by	 the	 Nagas.	 Dwaraka	 had	 to	 be	 saved	 at	 any	 cost.	 His	 brother
would	see	goodness	even	in	his	enemies	and	walk	into	a	trap.	Krishna	would
have	to	do	something	daring	again,	something	distasteful	to	people	who	forgot
to	 look	 at	 the	 whole	 picture.	 He	 had	 to	 do	 what	 he	 felt	 was	 right	 without
worrying	 about	 the	 results	 and	 what	 others	 would	 say	 about	 his	 methods.	 He
had	to	perform	his	karma.
Krishna	took	out	his	 Sudharshana	and	began	moving	towards	the	enemy.	 His
form	merged	with	the	shadows.	He	had	to	find	Ekalavya	before	his	brother	met
the	Nishada.
*****

8			REFUGE
	
“SISTER,	WHY	ARE	YOU	LEAVING	THE	PALACE?”	Gandhari	asked.

Kunti	ignored	her,	seething	with	rage.	She	ordered	the	maids	to	pack	only	two
saris	and	no	ornaments.	She	would	not	take	anything	that	belonged	to	that	hated
Duryodhana	 or	 his	 blind	 father.	 She	 would	 leave	 the	 palace	 with	 only	 the
possessions	she	had	brought	when	she	came	with	her	sons.	Kunti	did	not	want
anyone’s	charity,	not	when	she	had	five	warrior	sons.
Gandhari	found	her	way	to	her	sister-in-law	and	took	her	trembling	hands	in
her	own.	“Do	not	leave.	What	will	the	people	say	about	the	King?	About	me?”
“You	are	worried	about	appearances,	Gandhari.	I	have	suffered	enough,	living
in	your	palace.	Can	you	say	no	one	poisoned	me	or	arranged	to	stab	me	in	my
sleep?	I	have	had	enough.	I	will	not	stay	a	moment	longer	in	this	cursed	place.”
Gandhari	 withdrew	 her	 hands	 and	 steadied	 herself,	 trying	 hard	 to	 control	 the
sharp	words	that	rose	to	her	tongue.	What	right	had	Kunti	to	accuse	her?	She
was	the	daughter	of	the	great	Gandharan	King,	Suvala,	the	pativrata	who	 had
refused	the	light	denied	to	her	blind	husband;	no,	she	did	not	have	to	listen	to
accusations	 and	 abuse	 from	 a	 woman	 who	 had	 conceived	 children	 with	 men
other	 than	 her	 husband.	 Gandhari’s	 lips	 curled	 in	 disdain.	 “Sister,	 it	 is	 your
choice	to	leave.	Let	these	servants	be	witness	that	the	daughter	of	Gandhara	has
not	failed	in	her	dharma.”
Before	Kunti	could	answer,	Gandhari	had	turned	and	left	the	room.	When	she
reached	 the	 door	 of	 the	 royal	 chambers,	 she	 flinched	 at	 the	 sickening	 noise
coming	from	within.	Dhritarashtra	was	hammering	the	iron	replica	of	Bhima
with	 his	 mace.	 She	 walked	 in	 softly,	 not	 wishing	 to	 start	 a	 conversation.	 She
wanted	to	be	alone.	She	felt	triumphant,	afraid	and	angry	at	the	same	time.	In
her	heart,	she	had	hated	the	stiff	formalities	of	the	Hastinapura	court	from	the

day	she	had	set	foot	in	the	city	of	elephants.	Though	she	had	learned	to	love	her
husband	and	her	adopted	land,	she	yearned	for	Gandhara	in	the	quiet	moments
when	 she	 was	 alone.	 The	 vivid	 memories	 of	 the	 day	 her	 father	 and	 all	 her
brothers	 except	 Shakuni,	 died	 in	 Bhishma’s	 invasion,	 still	 haunted	 her	 in	 her
dreams.	 Even	 after	 all	 these	 years	 she	 woke	 moaning	 from	 her	 sleep,
mourning	 her	 father	 and	 brothers.	 Her	 husband	 no	 longer	 stirred	 in	 his
slumber,	nor	did	the	palace	maids	rush	to	enquire	about	her	troubled	dreams.
But	she	was	not	the	only	one	who	had	nightmares.	Some	nights,	the	shouts	of
Dhritarashtra	challenging	his	long	dead	brother,	Pandu,	to	a	duel,	would	echo
through	the	dark	corridors.	He	would	boast	how	his	strong	hands	had	stopped
an	elephant	from	trampling	his	brother	in	childhood,	and	how	much	better	he
was	 with	 the	 mace,	 despite	 his	 blindness.	 In	 the	 oppressive	 loneliness	 of	 the
crowded	palace,	in	the	royal	chamber	fragrant	with	exotic	perfumes,	Gandhari
would	sit	watching	her	sleeping	husband	–	pity,	revulsion	and	love	filling	her
heart.
She	hated	Kunti	with	a	vehemence	that	was	matched	only	by	Kunti’s	hatred	of
her.	 Her	 sharp	 intelligence	 allowed	 her	 to	 see	 how	 meaningless	 their	 hatred
was,	when	they	were	both	equal	sufferers	in	a	man’s	world	where	women	were
stolen,	pawned	or	deified,	but	never	treated	as	equals.	Yet	they	both	fought	like
trapped	 cats,	 not	 against	 the	 trap	 but	 each	 other,	 maiming	 and	 scratching,
fiercely	protective	of	their	kittens;	yet	showing	faces	of	gentility	and	loveliness
to	the	world	watching	them.
In	a	way,	Gandhari	was	relieved	Kunti	was	leaving,	but	cold	logic	told	her	that
it	was	better	to	let	Kunti	suffer	in	the	palace	than	turn	her	out.	She	knew	what
Kunti	was	trying	to	do	and	hated	her	for	her	deviousness,	while	admiring	her
intelligence.
Kunti	 was	 trying	 to	 turn	 public	 opinion	 against	 Duryodhana	 by	 playing	 the
martyr.	 In	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	 public,	 Kunti	 was	 now	 a	 helpless	 widow,	 who	 had
been	 thrown	 into	 the	 streets	 by	 the	 evil	 Duryodhana.	 Her	 son	 was	 now	 the
demon	who	had	tried	to	humiliate	Kunti’s	daughter-in-law	and	sent	his	cousins
into	exile	after	grabbing	all	their	possessions.
Dhritarashtra	gave	a	bitter	laugh	when	he	felt	Gandhari’s	presence	in	the	room.
He	turned	to	her	saying,	“Let	her	go,	Gandhari.	The	sons	of	Pandu	have	gone

to	where	 they	belong.	Those	begotten	slyly	in	the	 forest	belong	in	 the	forest.
The	palace	is	not	for	bastards.”
What	 did	 this	 man	 know	 of	 the	 beast	 their	 son	 had	 unleashed?	 There	 was	 no
point	answering	him.	He	would	not	understand.	Yet	she	could	not	help	saying,
“You	should	not	have	allowed	it	to	continue	after	the	first	game	of	dice.”
“Ah,	 my	 dear,	 I	 gave	 them	 back	 everything	 after	 the	 first	 game.	 I	 was	 more
generous	than	necessary	to	people	with	whom	I	share	no	blood.	I	did	not	ask
the	 son	 of	 dharma	 to	 play	 again.	 Besides,	 Pitamaha	 did	 not	 object,”
Dhritarashtra	chuckled.
“Do	 you	 know	 why	 Pitamaha	 did	 not	 object?	 Had	 the	 game	 ended	 there,	 you
would	 have	 outwitted	 everyone	 with	 your	 act	 of	 noble	 generosity.	 We	 would
have	proved	Yudhishtra	to	be	an	incompetent	ruler	who	could	keep	neither	his
kingdom	 nor	 his	 wife	 safe,	 and	 they	 would	 have	 been	 beholden	 to	 us.	 That
would	have	made	Pitamaha	irrelevant;	you	know	he	does	not	like	you	to	take
any	 decision	 without	 first	 consulting	 him.	 But	 now,	 everyone	 has	 forgotten
your	noble	act,	your	humility	in	asking	Draupadi’s	forgiveness,	and	your	good
heart.”
“Pitamaha	has	always	disliked	me,	Gandhari.	He	denied	me	the	crown	until	my
brother	died.	Is	it	my	fault	I	am	sightless?	In	Pitamaha’s	dharma,	an	impotent
man	 like	 my	 dead	 brother,	 Pandu,	 could	 be	 King,	 but	 not	 the	 blind
Dhritarashtra,	 who	 could	 defeat	 a	 hundred	 men	 in	 combat.	 He	 never	 did
anything	for	me.”
‘Except	invade	a	friendly	neighbouring	country,	butcher	the	King	and	his	sons
and	steal	the	Princess	to	marry	him	to	you,’	Gandhari	thought	bitterly.	“What	is
done	cannot	be	undone,”	she	said	calmly,	touching	her	husband’s	strong	hands.
“Call	 for	 Suyodhana.	 He	 needs	 to	 be	 told	 to	 stay	 quiet	 for	 some	 time.	 The
public	will	lynch	him	if	he	moves	out.	The	Magadhans	and	Sutas	have	spread
exaggerated	 stories	 of	 his	 bad	 behaviour.	 I	 wish	 Kunti	 had	 stayed	 in	 the
palace.”
***
Yudhishtra	walked	with	his	gaze	fixed	to	the	ground.	‘I	have	lost	everything.	I

have	 always	 followed	dharma	 and	 given	 gifts	 to	 the	 Brahmins.	 I	 have	 never
uttered	a	lie	in	my	life,	I	have	done	all	the	ritual	sacrifices,	yet	why	has	fortune
forsaken	me?	Mother	has	left	saying	she	does	not	trust	me,	that	I	might	gamble
her	away	too,	one	day.	Oh,	the	shame!	The	shame	of	walking	barefoot	on	the
streets	 where	 my	 golden	 chariot	 raced	 along,	 the	 shame	 of	 so	 many	 eyes
staring	at	my	wife’s	desolate	face.	Oh,	the	shame	of	losing	to	Duryodhana!’
A	 blind	 dog	 came	 up	 to	 him	 and	 wagged	 its	 tail.	 A	 mellifluous	 voice	 rose,
singing	of	Krishna’s	love	for	the	unfortunates	of	the	world.
“Bhima,	I	wait	for	the	day	you	will	bring	me	Dushasana’s	blood.	I	will	drink	it
with	relish.”
Yudhishtra	shuddered	at	Draupadi’s	words.	The	song	faded	away.	The	sound	of
rushing	 hooves	 passed	 them.	 Yudhishtra	 heard	 Arjuna	 exclaim	 between
clenched	teeth	that	it	was	Shakuni,	Prince	of	Gandhara.	He	heard	Sahadeva	vow
to	crush	the	bastard’s	skull	one	day.	Yudhishtra	did	not	speak	a	word.	As	they
turned	a	bend	on	the	royal	highway,	he	paused	to	look	back	at	the	palace	for	the
last	time.
“Why	 look	 back	 now?	 You	 gambled	 and	 lost	 everything.”	 Draupadi’s	 words
furrowed	his	heart.	“Never	forget,	Yudhishtra,	never	forget	my	shame,	now	or
ever,”	Draupadi	said	clearly	as	she	walked	past.	His	brothers	followed	her.
The	 crowd	 that	 had	 tagged	 after	 them	 at	 first	 had	 long	 dispersed	 to	 their
mundane	routines.	Yudhishtra	stooped	to	gather	a	fistful	of	earth.	He	caught	the
eye	of	the	beggar	who	had	been	singing,	sitting	under	a	tree	close	by.	He	felt
embarrassed	 by	 his	 action.	 Did	 the	 beggar	 shake	 his	 head	 in	 disapproval?
Yudhishtra	 could	 not	 be	 sure.	 When	 he	 looked	 back,	 both	 the	 beggar	 and	 the
dog	had	vanished.
***
Vidhura	 coughed,	 masking	 his	 hesitation.	 “Devi,	 I	 will	 send	 the	 priests	 to
perform	the	ritual	cleansing	of	this	house.”	He	knew	the	rituals	were	essential
to	make	a	Shudra	home	fit	for	a	Kshatriya	lady.	Kunti	nodded	silently.
As	Vidhura	began	walking	away,	Kunti	said	softly,”	I	do	not	know	how	to	thank

you,	brother,	but	when	my	son	Yudhishtra	becomes	King,	I	will	ensure	you	are
sufficiently	rewarded.”
Until	 that	 moment,	 Vidhura	 had	 not	 known	 that	 so	 much	 frustration	 lay
dormant	within	him.	He	turned	back,	suppressing	the	retort	that	rose	unbidden
to	his	lips.	“I	am	always	at	your	service.	I	but	do	my	duty.”
Vidhura	 gritted	 his	 teeth,	 trying	 to	 suppress	 the	 anger	 he	 felt.	 When	 he	 had
returned	 home	 from	 the	 Sabha,	 he	 had	 found	 Kunti	 waiting	 for	 him.	 She	 did
not	 wish	 to	 live	 in	 the	 palace,	 she	 said.	 He	 knew	 what	 she	 wanted.	 Without	 a
word	he	had	ordered	his	wife	to	pack	up.	They	would	move	to	their	unfinished
home	in	the	woods.	He	had	not	even	allowed	his	wife	to	voice	her	dissent.
“God	bless	you,”	Kunti	said	again.
Vidhura	felt	pity	for	her,	mingled	with	contempt.	He	did	not	wish	to	embarrass
her	 further.	 The	 pride	 in	 the	 sacrifice	 he	 was	 making	 was	 exhilarating.	 His
family	were	already	far	ahead	on	the	road	and	he	hurried	to	join	them.	As	he
walked,	dry	leaves	cartwheeled	in	the	breeze,	dancing	in	the	dust	that	swirled
around	him.	A	blush	tinted	the	eastern	sky.	The	birds	had	begun	stirring	in	their
nests.	 The	 street	 was	 deserted,	 though	 he	 could	 hear	 the	 sounds	 of	 cooking
from	a	few	homes.	Vidhura	felt	overwhelmed	by	the	events	of	the	day.	He	had
tried	 his	 utmost	 to	 stop	 the	 shaming	 of	 the	 Princess	 Draupadi.	 Why	 had	 even
Bhishma	 remained	 silent,	 and	 why	 had	 he	 reacted	 so	 violently	 to	 Suyodhana
once	the	event	was	over?	There	had	been	no	need	to	sacrifice	Karna.	Was	he
seeing	 another	 side	 of	 Bhishma,	 a	 ruthless	 streak	 which	 Bhishma	 had	 kept
hidden	 from	 him?	 The	 more	 he	 thought	 of	 the	 incident	 in	 the	 Sabha,	 the
angrier	he	became.	No	one	had	listened	to	him,	and	no	one	would	be	spared.
More	than	the	incident	itself,	it	was	the	fact	that	he	had	been	ignored	that	upset
Vidhura’s	normally	calm	mind.	All	his	self-consciousness	about	being	the	son
of	a	dasi,	all	the	insults,	big	and	small,	that	he	had	faced	from	childhood,	and
all	his	fears	of	becoming	irrelevant	in	the	coming	age,	added	to	his	frustration.
What	right	had	men	like	Bhishma,	Drona,	Kripa	or	Dhaumya	to	rule	over	him,
when	 they	 behaved	 in	 such	 a	 cavalier	 fashion	 when	 a	 woman	 was	 insulted	 in
public?	They	were	proud	to	be	Brahmins	and	Kshatriyas,	yet	they	had	not	had
the	courage	to	speak	out	against	adharma.	Only	the	son	of	a	dasi	had	spoken
out	against	Suyodhana,	there	had	been	no	dissent,	except	for	the	meek	voice	of

young	Prince	Vikarna.
Vidhura	now	felt	a	rising	contempt	for	all	the	men	he	had	held	in	high	esteem
before.	 He,	 a	 Shudra,	 would	 observe	 dharma	 more	 perfectly	 than	 all	 those
highborn	men,	he	vowed.	He	had	even	given	up	his	home	for	Kunti	to	live	in.
He	would	show	the	world	nobility	lay	in	one’s	thoughts	and	deeds	and	not	in
belonging	 to	 a	 particular	 caste.	 He	 would	 show	 them	 by	 his	 deeds	 who	 was
superior	 –	 the	 Kshatriyas	 who	 gambled	 and	 fought,	 or	 the	 Brahmins	 who
debated	 endlessly	 about	 the	 nuances	 of	 scriptures,	 or	 he,	 the	 son	 of	 a	 dasi.
Suddenly	he	remembered	Kunti’s	words	about	Yudhishtra	becoming	King	and
stopped	in	his	tracks.	A	deep	sense	of	foreboding	gripped	him.	There	would	be
a	 war;	 he	 was	 sure	 of	 it.	 All	 that	 Bhishma	 and	 he	 had	 worked	 for	 would	 be
futile.
A	 small	 contingent	 of	 cavalry	 was	 approaching	 fast,	 their	 bobbing	 forms
obscuring	 the	 rising	 sun.	 A	 few	 elephants	 and	 some	 rickety	 war	 chariots
followed.	 When	 Karna	 passed	 by,	 Vidhura	 remembered	 Bhishma’s	 vow.
Karna’s	 victory	 would	 end	 the	 Grand	 Regent’s	 time	 at	 the	 helm	 of	 affairs.
Would	 he	 himself	 be	 able	 to	 work	 under	 Suyodhana?	 Could	 he	 work	 under
anyone	other	than	the	gruff	old	man?	He	was	afraid	to	think	of	the	beasts	that
lay	crouched	in	the	dark	folds	of	time.	Perhaps	Karna	would	not	return.
As	 he	 was	 nearing	 the	 forest,	 Vidhura	 saw	 another	 contingent	 of	 cavalry
rushing	 north,	 with	 Aswathama	 riding	 in	 the	 lead.	 Where	 were	 they	 going?
Why	did	these	young	men	so	desperately	seek	danger?	From	whom	were	they
running?	Vidhura	could	almost	hear	Shakuni’s	laughter	and	the	dice	rolling	on
the	 floor.	 Someone	 was	 moving	 his	 pieces	 dexterously.	 They	 were	 all	 mere
pawns	 in	 the	 deadly	 game	 of	 dice.	 He	 looked	 in	 the	 direction	 were
Aswathama’s	 cavalry	 had	 vanished	 and	 said	 softly,	 “Son	 of	 Drona,	 do	 you
know	what	awaits	you	in	the	snow-clad	heights	of	Gandhara?	Why	are	you	so
naively	 rushing	 to	 your	 death?”	 An	 owl	 that	 was	 perched	 on	 a	 branch	 above
him	hooted	as	if	in	reply.
Vidhura	 wiped	 his	 perspiring	 face	 and	 hurried	 to	 catch	 up	 with	 his	 wife	 and
sons.
*****

9			TRAPPED
	
KARNA	 LOOKED	 AT	 THE	 VAST	 ARMY	spread	before	him.	His	steady	gaze	betrayed

none	of	the	desperation	he	felt	within.	How	long	could	he	hold	out?	His	own
army	 looked	 puny	 compared	 to	 the	 ocean	 of	 men,	 horses	 and	 war	 elephants
that	waited	on	the	other	bank	of	the	Narmada.	He	dismounted,	abandoning	his
horse	 for	 a	 chariot.	 It	 meant	 putting	 his	 trust	 in	 an	 unknown	 charioteer	 of
Sindh,	but	it	was	the	only	way	he	could	use	his	stockpile	of	weapons.
The	 first	 arrow	 struck	 perilously	 close	 to	 where	 Karna	 stood,	 spraying
splinters	of	wood	around	him.	From	a	distance,	King	Uthayan	raised	his	bow
in	 challenge.	 Karna	 answered	 with	 an	 arrow	 that	 took	 down	 the	 flag	 of	 the
Chera	 King,	 smiling	 at	 the	 rage	 his	 shot	 produced.	 “Flame-throwers	 to	 the
front,”	he	barked	and	three	dozen	men	arrived	in	response	to	his	command.
The	 Confederate	 army	 answered	 with	 its	 own	 volley	 of	 flame-tipped	 arrows.
Shrieks	of	men	on	fire,	the	neighing	of	frightened	horses	and	the	trumpeting
of	 crazed	 elephants	 filled	 the	 air.	 What	 was	 that	 moving	 in	 the	 Confederate
ranks?	The	ripple	travelled	quickly	through	the	enemy	lines.	A	major	faction
of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 army	 broke	 ranks	 and	 began	 crossing	 the	 river.
To	 Karna’s	 surprise,	 they	 were	 not	 shooting	 at	 the	 Hastinapura	 army	 but	 at
their	own	soldiers.
“Stop	 firing!	 Wait!”	 Karna	 yelled.	 Immediately,	 runners	 dashed	 off	 in	 all
directions	to	convey	his	order.
A	huge	column	of	the	Confederate	army	was	advancing	in	a	wide	arc	towards
him.	Was	it	a	ruse?	Why	then	were	they	holding	white	flags?	As	the	first	horse
climbed	out	of	water,	their	faces	became	clearer.	Karna	looked	up	at	the	sun,
murmuring	a	prayer	of	thankfulness.
The	 King	 of	 Kalinga	 dismounted	 from	 his	 horse	 and	 bowed	 low.	 Karna	 felt

weak	at	the	knees.	He	had	been	lucky,	again.	“Sir,	we	crave	your	pardon.	You
are	the	chosen	warrior	of	the	Sun	God.	We	cannot	fight	against	you.”
The	 game	 had	 changed.	 The	 odds	 no	 longer	 seemed	 impossible.	 ‘How	 can	 I
thank	this	man,	this	venerable	old	King	of	Kalinga,	whose	belief	in	his	God	is
stronger	than	caste	prejudices?’	wondered	Karna.
“Get	the	traitor	first	and	leave	the	Suta	to	me.”
Karna	was	shocked	by	Uthayan’s	voice	so	near	him.	An	arrow	zipped	past	the
King	 of	 Kalinga.	 Before	 Karna	 could	 think,	 the	 rushing	 cavalry	 of	 the
Confederate	descended	on	them	like	a	tidal	wave.
“In	the	name	of	Surya,”	Karna	yelled	over	the	din	of	metal	clashing	on	metal,
horses	neighing	and	men	crying	in	pain.	He	jumped	into	his	chariot	and	drew
his	 bow.	 His	 first	 arrow	 broke	 Uthayan’s	 bow.	 The	 next	 wounded	 the	 Chera
King’s	forearm.
The	waters	of	the	Narmada	turned	red	with	the	blood	of	men	and	beasts.	The
doubts	that	had	plagued	Karna	that	morning	gave	way	to	reckless	enthusiasm.
He	 lost	 count	 of	 the	 men	 he	 killed	 with	 his	 precise	 volley	 of	 arrows.
Nevertheless,	the	Confederate	forces	pressed	on.
“Your	Highness,	with	your	permission...”	In	the	mad	melée,	Karna	did	not	hear
what	the	Brahmin	warrior	near	him	was	trying	to	say.	Before	he	could	answer,
the	 man	 had	 gone,	 his	 horse	 jumping	 over	 obstacles	 and	 dodging	 arrows.
‘Where	have	I	seen	him?’	wondered	Karna	for	a	split	moment.	As	the	daredevil
equestrian	disappeared	among	the	Confederate	armies,	the	answer	came	to	him
in	a	flash.	He	was	the	Brahmin	warrior	from	Kalinga,	who	had	come	first	in
horse	racing	so	long	ago	in	Muzaris.	But	what	was	he	up	to	now?
An	 arrow	 from	 the	 King	 of	 Vatapi,	 a	 Confederate	 General,	 struck	 Karna’s
breastplate	and	fell	to	the	chariot	floor	with	a	clang.	It	lay	vibrating	as	if	alive.
Karna	 returned	 fire	 in	one	fluid	movement.	Using	the	catapult	 attached	to	his
chariot,	 he	 propelled	 a	 mud	 pot	 of	 oil,	 hitting	 the	 Vatapi	 King’s	 chariot,
drenching	it	in	oil.	He	picked	up	the	arrows	wrapped	in	oilcloth,	held	them	to
the	 pot	of	fire	and	 shot	off	the	flaming	 missile.	The	 Vatapi	 chariot	burst	 into
flames,	 causing	 the	 panicked	 horses	 to	 plunge	 in	 their	 harness	 and	 run	 wild.

Some	 soldiers	 attempted	 to	 extract	 their	 King	 but	 the	 chariot	 collapsed	 in	 a
burning	heap.	As	his	men	watched	in	horror,	their	King	was	charred	to	death
along	with	the	horses.
Karna	 immediately	 realized	 his	 error	 of	 judgement.	 The	 Confederate	 armies
had	 resisted	 using	 unconventional	 weapons	 thus	 far.	 Till	 then	 the	 battle	 had
been	fought	using	Hastamuktha	arrows	and	manual	weapons.	Now	that	he	had
broken	 the	 unwritten	 code	 of	 warriors	 by	 using	 a	 Yantramuktha	 missile,
launched	 from	 a	 mechanical	 contraption,	 there	 was	 nothing	 to	 stop	 them
pounding	the	Hastinapura	army	with	their	own	missiles.	It	had	been	a	trap	and
he	had	fallen	into	it.	Karna	berated	himself	for	being	an	unthinking	fool.
Smoking	 arrows	 carrying	 poisonous	 herbs	 started	 descending	 on	 his	 forces.
Nagastras!	They	were	notorious	for	leaving	a	trail	of	smoke	that	carried	death
with	every	breath.	Karna’s	men	started	falling	as	the	smoke	spread	among	the
ranks.	He	desperately	searched	for	the	antidote.	His	Guru	had	taught	him	about
the	herbs	capable	of	neutralizing	the	Nagastras.	Where	was	the	damned	cache?
Choking	 and	 coughing,	 Karna	 rummaged	 through	 his	 weapons.	 A	 fire-tipped
arrow	 lodged	 itself	 in	 the	 canopy	 above	 his	 head	 and	 the	 material	 burst	 into
flames.	 Through	 the	 haze	 and	 smoke	 he	 saw	 a	 pot	 of	 oil	 flying	 towards	 him
and	the	smile	on	Uthayan’s	face.	Time	was	running	out.	Karna	quickly	mixed
the	herb	powders,	praying	he	had	got	it	right.	He	did	not	even	wish	to	imagine
the	 terrible	consequences,	should	the	mixture	go	wrong.	He	thanked	God	for
the	body	armour	that	protected	him	from	the	arrows	that	struck	him.	He	put	the
mixture	into	a	pot	of	oil	and	loaded	it	in	the	catapult.	The	pot	began	smoking,
emitting	a	noxious	smell.
An	 arrow	 struck	 one	 of	 Karna’s	 horses.	 Something	 exploded	 near	 him,
bursting	 into	 flames.	 It	 was	 only	 a	 matter	 of	 time	 before	 an	 oil	 pot	 exploded
inside	the	chariot,	which	stood	tilted	at	a	crazy	angle.	The	charioteer	lay	dead,
an	 arrow	 sticking	 out	 of	 his	 neck.	 The	 wounded	 horse	 whinnied	 in	 agony,
making	the	chariot	rattle.
As	 if	 possessed,	 Karna	 mixed	 ingredients	 and	 hurled	 pots	 among	 his	 men.
Those	who	had	survived	the	first	blast	of	the	Nagastras	began	recovering	with
his	antidote.	The	time	had	come	to	pay	back	the	Confederate	armies,	but	before
that,	he	had	to	release	the	horse	from	its	agony.	To	do	so,	he	had	to	get	down
from	the	chariot	–	a	dangerous	step	which	would	make	him	vulnerable.	Karna

jumped	 down.	 Instantly,	 the	 shower	 of	 arrows	 harassing	 him	 stopped.	 He
turned	 to	 look	 and	 read	 the	 impatience	 in	 Uthayan’s	 eyes	 to	 slay	 him	 but	 the
Chera	King	held	fire	until	Karna	got	back	into	position.
The	 moment	 Karna	 once	 again	 stepped	 into	 the	 chariot,	 an	 arrow	 struck	 his
thigh	and	fell	off.	He	shot	back	in	anger,	pinning	Uthayan’s	hand	to	the	shaft	of
the	canopy	above	him.	Karna	could	see	blood	spurting	from	the	wound	as	the
Asura	King	tried	to	free	his	hand.	He	toyed	with	the	idea	of	sending	an	arrow
into	the	throat	of	his	foe,	but	remembered	Uthayan	had	not	shot	him	when	he
was	 out	 of	 his	 chariot.	 Instead,	 Karna’s	 next	 arrow	 pinned	 Uthayan’s	 other
hand,	 causing	 him	 to	 close	 his	 eyes	 in	 pain.	 The	 Confederate	 forces	 rushed
forward	to	prevent	Karna	from	killing	one	of	their	Kings.	Even	in	his	pinned
position,	Uthayan	barked	commands	and	the	army	closed	in.	The	warriors	of
Kalinga	surrounded	Karna.	He	attempted	to	keep	them	at	bay,	but	the	circle	was
shrinking	fast.
When	all	seemed	lost,	Karna	saw	the	Brahmin	warrior	from	Kalinga,	the	man
who	had	plunged	into	the	enemy	ranks.	He	had	managed	to	stay	alive	and	reach
the	rear	of	the	enemy	lines.	Karna	saw	a	flame-tipped	arrow	rise	high	into	the
sky	 and	fall	deep	 into	the	Confederate	elephant	 corps.	For	a	moment	 nothing
happened,	then	the	first	elephant	ran	amok,	smashing	into	the	one	ahead	of	it.
The	 second	 elephant	 turned	 back,	 enraged,	 breaking	 rank	 and	 starting	 a
stampede.	The	panicked	elephants	charged,	trampling	friend	and	foe	alike.	The
smell	of	poisonous	herbs	and	powders	pervaded	the	air.	There	were	explosions
everywhere.	Oil	pots	burst	and	catapults	discharged,	creating	ever	more	panic
and	rage	in	the	elephants.
The	horses,	struggling	to	get	free,	dragged	Karna’s	chariot	hither	and	thither.
An	elephant	smashed	into	Uthayan’s	chariot,	toppling	it.	The	mammoth	gored
the	horses	with	its	iron-capped	tusks	and	crushed	the	Chera	King’s	chariot	into
rubble.	 There	 was	 no	 way	 Uthayan	 could	 have	 survived	 that,	 thought	 Karna.
But	before	he	could	indulge	in	a	sense	of	relief,	he	was	thrown	from	his	own
chariot	by	a	stampeding	elephant.	The	wooden	box	hung	perilously	above	him
for	a	second,	as	if	hesitating	to	fall	over	him.	Then,	with	a	sickening	crash,	the
chariot	came	down	on	him,	trapping	him	inside	its	dark	confines.
Karna	tried	to	lift	the	chariot,	pushing	with	his	powerful	shoulders.	His	whole
body	ached.	What	was	that	low	rumbling	outside?	The	whinnying	of	the	horses

and	the	trumpeting	of	elephants	filtered	through	the	cracks	of	his	coffin.	The
Southern	 Confederate	 elephants	 were	 running	 amok,	 his	 upturned	 chariot	 in
their	path,	with	him	trapped	inside	like	a	bauble	in	a	baby’s	rattle.
The	lid	of	the	cache	containing	the	poisonous	weapons	flew	open	and	powders
began	 raining	 on	 him.	 A	 skin-burning	 itching	 and	 throat-choking	 blackness
descended	on	Karna.
*****

10			AHIMSA
	
“KRISHNA,	 WHY	 DID	 YOU	 DO	 IT?”	 Balarama	 knelt	 beside	 the	 lifeless	 bodies	 of

Dhantavakra	and	Shalva.
“They	were	trying	to	kill	us	all,	you,	me,	Balarama...”
“No,	Krishna,	they	were	not;	we	had	already	defeated	them.	They	were	on	the
verge	of	surrender.	They	had	put	down	their	arms.	Balarama	had	proposed	an
honourable	 surrender,	 but	 you...”	 Kritavarma	 stood	 glaring	 at	 Krishna,
puzzlement	and	contempt	fighting	their	own	battle	over	the	lined	terrain	of	his
face.
“Kritavarma,	they	were	going	to	sack	our	city.	They	were	killed	in	battle.	Does
it	 matter	 how?	 Yes,	 I	 used	 my	 Sudharshana	 from	 behind	 to	 cut	 their
undeserving	throats.	An	enemy	slain	is	an	enemy	less.	The	methods	are	mere
details.	My	city	and	people	are	safe	and	that	is	the	only	thing	that	counts.	Why
is	there	an	argument	over	it?	Instead	of	wasting	time,	we	should	be	looking	for
their	leader,	ah...Ekalavya.	Where	has	he	vanished	to?”
Balarama	stood	up	wearily	and	began	walking	through	the	battlefield,	wet	with
blood	and	excreta.	The	battle	was	over;	the	Yadavas	had	won;	but	the	weight	of
victory	caused	his	shoulders	to	stoop.	He	did	not	want	to	stand	there	and	listen
to	his	brother	and	his	Commander	argue	over	the	rights	and	wrongs	of	the	war.
All	 war	 was	 wrong.	 The	 wailing	 widows	 walking	 from	 the	 city	 gates	 in
procession	to	search	for	the	bodies	of	their	loved	ones	was	proof	enough	for
him.	 For	 a	 child	 who	 had	 lost	 his	 father,	 what	 did	 it	 matter	 whether	 they	 had
won	 or	 not?	 ‘Oh,	 Rama,	 what	 have	 I	 done?’	 His	 heart	 heavy	 with	 sorrow,
Balarama	 walked	 on.	 As	 he	 stopped	 to	 look	 at	 each	 body	 with	 equal	 pain,
unmindful	 whether	 the	 dead	 one	 was	 Yadava	 or	 Naga,	 the	 vultures	 fluttered
their	wings	angrily,	waiting	for	access	to	the	pickings.

Balarama	 stopped	 near	 a	 Naga	 who,	 at	 death’s	 door,	 was	 trying	 to	 say
something.	Balarama	put	his	ear	close	to	his	mouth.	“Water,”	the	feeble	voice
said.	 Something	inside	 Balarama’s	 mind	gave	way	with	the	simple	request	of
the	dying	man.	He	ran	about,	frantically	searching	for	water.	He	yelled	to	some
guards	to	fetch	water.	Krishna	and	Kritavarma	stopped	their	argument	to	stare.
Krishna	ran	towards	his	brother,	trying	to	mask	his	concern.
“Krishna,	get	some	water.	The	poor	man	is	dying.	Hurry...”
“Brother,	he	is	beyond	help.	It	 was	 war.	Let	the	 man	 die	like	 a	warrior.	What
has	happened	to	you?”	Krishna	turned	to	order	a	soldier	to	fetch	water	for	the
dying	man.
A	guard	came	running	with	a	pot	of	water	and	Balarama	snatched	it	from	his
hands.	But	when	he	turned,	the	Naga	had	no	need	of	the	water.	His	lifeless	eyes
stared	at	Balarama.	The	pot	fell	from	his	hands	and	broke,	water	drenching	the
blood-soaked	earth.	The	leader	of	the	Yadavas	stood	staring	at	the	little	bubbles
that	 lingered	 on	 the	 surface	 for	 a	 few	 moments	 before	 popping.	 Balarama
turned	 and	 walked	 towards	 the	 palace,	 dragging	 his	 mace	 over	 the	 ground,
trying	to	shut	out	the	images	of	the	dead	and	dying.	He	walked	past	the	wailing
widows	and	did	not	even	pause	to	acknowledge	the	bows	of	his	soldiers.
“Where	had	the	Nishada	vanished?	We	should	have	taken	him,	dead	or	alive.”
Balarama	paused	a	moment	when	he	heard	his	brother	chastise	the	soldiers.	He
knew	where	Ekalavya	had	vanished	to	but	he	did	not	wish	to	tell	Krishna.	He
had	 seen	 Ekalavya	 running	 along	 the	 fort	 walls	 when	 Krishna	 was	 slaying
Shalva.	 For	 a	 moment	 Balarama	 had	 considered	 shooting	 the	 Nishada	 down
with	an	arrow.	He	knew	he	could	do	it,	yet	he	did	not.	Ekalavya	had	vanished.
He	may	have	jumped	into	the	sea.	It	was	a	steep	drop	from	the	ramparts	and	it
was	doubtful	that	he	had	made	it	alive.	If	he	had	survived,	he	deserved	to	live.
But	let	his	path	never	cross	that	of	his	brother.
Balarama	walked	on,	his	head	bent	low.	He	felt	like	a	criminal.	‘Why	did	I	kill
so	many	people?	Who	am	I	to	take	the	life	of	another	living	being?’	Violence
and	bloodshed,	he	was	sick	of	it.	He	did	not	hear	the	cheers	of	the	people	who
thronged	the	road.	Krishna’s	chariot	stopped	near	him.	Balarama	looked	at	his
brother	 standing	 in	 all	 his	 divine	 glory.	 When	 he	 shook	 his	 head,	 Krishna’s

chariot	moved	forward	with	a	jerk.	From	both	sides	of	the	road,	people	threw
garlands	 and	 coins.	 Victory	 cries	 rent	 the	 air.	 Balarama	 remained	 deaf	 to	 the
cheering.	 ‘Rama,	 Rama,	 what	 have	 I	 done?’	 he	 mumbled	 to	 himself	 as	 he
walked,	his	feet	crushing	the	flowers	his	people	were	throwing	at	him.
Krishna’s	 eyes	 searched	 for	 Ekalavya.	 Where	 had	 the	 Nishada	 vanished?	 He
was	dangerous.	Krishna	admired	the	man	who	had	fought	his	way	up	from	the
bottom	of	the	caste	hierarchy	and	turned	himself	into	a	fearsome	warrior.	But
the	Nishada	was	filled	with	bitterness,	and	that	made	him	a	danger	to	society.
He	 had	 to	 be	 made	 to	 see	 reason.	 A	 man	 who	 was	 so	 determined	 could	 be
utilised	for	the	benefit	of	society,	provided	he	knew	his	position.	He	was	born	a
Nishada;	 instead	 of	 trying	 to	 be	 a	 Kshatriya,	 why	 he	 did	 not	 concentrate	 on
making	the	lives	of	his	fellow	Nishadas	better?	Why	he	was	so	bent	on	beating
Arjuna	and	proving	himself	the	better	warrior?	What	if	every	Nishada	started
feeling	that	way?	No,	for	peace,	everyone	had	to	strive	to	be	better	within	his
kuladharma.	If	he	wanted	respect,	why	did	he	not	become	a	sanyasi?	The	path
of	 spirituality	 had	 no	 varna,	 or	 jati.	 Valmiki	 had	 been	 a	 dacoit	 before	 he
became	 a	 hermit	 and	 wrote	 the	 Ramayana;	 Vyasa	 was	 a	 fisherman’s	 son;
Viswamitra	a	Kshatriya;	yet	they	were	all	respected	irrespective	of	their	caste
in	their	 purvashrama.	But	when	people	 aspired	 for	 what	was	 not	destined	for
them,	 they	 created	 havoc.	 Parashurama	 was	 an	 example.	 The	 Brahmin	 had
caused	 so	 much	 bloodshed	 trying	 to	 act	 like	 a	 Kshatriya.	 Aswathama	 was
another	 danger;	 he	 could	 bring	 disaster	 trying	 to	 act	 like	 a	 Kshatriya.	 But
Karna’s	audacity	was	the	most	intolerable.	Society	was	in	shambles.	If	only	his
brother	 had	 captured	 Ekalavya,	 he	 could	 have	 made	 the	 Nishada	 see	 reason.
Who	knew,	with	his	intelligence	he	could	have	become	another	great	poet	who
would	chronicle	the	story	of	Gods	and	avatars.	Where	had	the	man	gone?
Unknown	 to	 Krishna,	 Ekalavya	 was	 fighting	 a	 grim	 battle	 for	 survival	 just	 a
few	yojanas	away	from	the	Dwaraka	fort.	In	this,	neither	his	superlative	skills
with	the	bow	nor	his	prowess	with	the	sword	were	of	any	help.	All	alone	in	the
roaring,	frothing	darkness,	under	a	dark	and	uncaring	sky,	the	waves	exploded
with	mirth	as	they	pounded	him	senseless.
*****

11			THE	CHASE
	
“BEWARE!”	THE	YOUNG	CAPTAIN	SHOUTED.

Aswathama	yanked	on	his	horse’s	reins,	bringing	the	steed	to	a	plunging	halt	in
the	 very	 nick	 of	 time.	 A	 massive	 boulder	 missed	 him	 by	 inches	 and	 crashed
onto	the	narrow	path	behind	him	with	a	thud.	It	then	bounced	down	the	cliff’s
face	and	disappeared	into	the	river	deep	below,	felling	a	few	trees	on	its	way.
The	splash	of	the	boulder	hitting	the	water	sounded	unusually	loud.
When	the	dust	cleared,	Aswathama	was	still	trying	to	steady	his	panicked	horse.
One	 missed	 step	 and	 he	 knew	 he	 would	 follow	 the	 path	 made	 by	 the	 boulder
and	 splatter	 like	 an	 eggshell	 a	 thousand	 feet	 below.	 His	 heart	 pounded	 in	 his
chest.	Had	the	boulder	been	an	accident	or	was	someone	following	them?	He
looked	 around;	 the	 place	 looked	 desolate	 and	 forlorn.	 Nothing	 stirred.	 Far
below,	 the	 Deodar	 trees	 in	 the	 valley	 had	 turned	 white	 with	 their	 burden	 of
snow.	The	eerie	silence	when	the	wind	stopped	howling	was	frightening.	The
mountain	 crouched	 like	 a	 wounded	 beast.	 He	 had	 undertaken	 this	 mission
thinking	it	would	be	an	adventure.	He	had	always	longed	to	see	the	ivory-tipped
peaks	 of	 the	 Himalayas.	 It	 had	 been	 so	 inviting	 and	 he	 had	 jumped	 at	 the
opportunity.	In	the	distance,	he	could	see	the	mountain	ranges	dissolving	into
the	sky.	He	wanted	to	rub	his	hands	to	get	the	circulation	back	but	was	afraid	to
let	go	of	the	reins.	It	was	freezing	cold.	The	chill	pierced	his	skin	and	gnawed
at	his	bones.	But	more	than	the	elements,	it	was	the	inaction	and	boredom	that
was	killing	him.
“Where	 are	 the	 bastards	 hiding?”	 Aswathama	 asked,	 more	 to	 himself	 than	 of
the	Captain.
“Sir,	I	think	we	have	lost	our	way	again.”
Aswathama	heard	the	pain	and	frustration	in	the	Captain’s	voice	and	his	anger
returned	in	a	flood.	“No,	we	have	not!”	He	watched	the	words	escape	his	mouth

in	white	puffs.	An	argument	would	have	been	welcome,	but	his	Captain	refused
to	oblige.
As	 silence	 crawled	 back,	 Aswathama	 loosened	 the	 reins	 and	 the	 horse
sauntered	forward.	His	army	of	thirty-six	men	dragged	itself	behind	him	along
the	treacherous	mountain	path.	It	had	started	to	snow	again.
Boom!	A	scream	followed	the	crash.	Aswathama	almost	fell	from	his	saddle.
They	 had	 been	 hit.	 In	 that	 instant	 he	 knew	 the	 first	 boulder	 had	 been	 no
coincidence	and	that	more	were	on	their	way.	The	second	one	hit	the	rear	of	the
column	and	carried	away	two	men,	along	with	their	horses.	Aswathama	knew
that	all	his	skill	as	a	great	archer	was	futile	in	this	battle.	He	was	not	fighting	on
the	 vast	 and	 dusty	 plains	 of	 India.	 Gandhara	 had	 the	 reputation	 of	 teaching
reigning	superpowers	and	invaders	hard	and	unforgettable	lessons.
The	next	boulder	crashed	down	just	behind	Aswathama,	hitting	the	Captain	and
his	horse.	He	saw	them	topple	over	the	cliff	and	vanish	into	the	depths	below.
The	agonized	screams	of	the	man	and	his	beast	echoed	around	them,	making
the	survivors	edgy.	He	could	sense	the	fear	of	his	companions.	What	was	that
moving	there?	Rather,	who	was	it?	Aswathama	peered	up	towards	the	top	of	the
mountain,	 shading	 his	 red-rimmed	 eyes	 with	 his	 hand.	 He	 had	 seen	 someone
moving.	Or	was	the	snow	playing	its	usual	games	of	illusion?	As	he	gazed	at
the	point	high	above,	a	silent	scream	began	to	rise	from	his	belly.	The	warrior
in	 him	 sensed	 it	 long	 before	 his	 eyes	 could	 see.	 The	 enemy	 had	 waited	 until
they	reached	this	narrow	path	–	the	cliff	face	towered	on	one	side	and	the	deep
abyss	plunged	into	darkness	on	the	other.	It	was	the	perfect	spot	for	an	ambush.
Aswathama’s	right	hand	inched	towards	his	sword.	At	that	moment,	the	entire
mountain	began	to	reverberate	as	mounted	warriors	began	descending	on	them
at	great	speed.	“Advance!”	he	shouted,	galloping	like	a	man	possessed.	He	had
to	 get	 off	 the	 narrow	 path.	 It	 was	 now	 or	 never.	 The	 mountainside	 began
exploding	behind	them.
The	Brahmin	warrior	and	his	daredevil	companions	rushed	across	the	gravelstrewn	goat	trail.	Boulders	rolled	down,	frightening	the	horses	and	threatening
to	dash	them	all	into	the	waters	far	below.	Behind	them,	men	with	faces	masked
with	the	ends	of	their	turbans,	chased	them	towards	their	deaths.

“Either	we	will	get	that	bastard	today	or	we	will	all	perish.	We	owe	ourselves
warrior ’s	 deaths	 in	 the	 service	 of	 Prince	 Suyodhana	 and	 our	 country,”
Aswathama	shouted	over	the	din,	trying	to	motivate	his	companions.	He	could
not	be	sure	they	heard	him.
But	his	next	action	inspired	them	to	follow	suit.	It	was	one	of	reckless	courage,
yet	the	very	insanity	of	it	made	his	small	band	of	men	delirious.	Aswathama	let
go	the	reins	of	his	horse	and	stood	up	in	his	saddle,	facing	the	Gandharans,	his
back	to	his	galloping	horse’s	head.	Balancing	perilously,	he	drew	his	bow	and
arrow.	 His	 men	 did	 the	 same.	 His	 first	 arrow	 pierced	 the	 throat	 of	 the	 man
leading	the	attack;	those	of	his	companions	caused	many	others	to	fall.
“Shoot	only	to	kill...shoot...shoot!”	Aswathama	kept	screaming	as	he	showered
lethal	arrows	on	his	foes.
Although	 they	 had	 managed	 to	 slow	 down	 their	 pursuers,	 Aswathama	 knew
they	could	not	continue	holding	them	off.	A	single	missed	step	by	one	of	the
horses	 or	 a	 hit	 by	 any	 of	 the	 boulders	 falling	 around	 them	 would	 finish
everything.
Then	 Aswathama	 saw	 him	 and	 almost	 slipped	 from	 his	 saddle.	 The	 cloth
covering	the	face	of	one	of	the	pursuers	fluttered	back	in	the	wind.	There	was
no	mistaking	that	face...	He	had	never	expected	Shakuni	to	lead	from	the	front.
Though	it	was	said	he	was	a	great	warrior,	trained	by	Bhishma	himself,	it	was
difficult	to	imagine	the	conniving	bastard	doing	well	under	fire.
‘One	direct	hit,	is	all	I	need,’	thought	Aswathama	desperately.	His	next	arrow
shaved	 Shakuni’s	 neck	 but	 the	 Gandharan	 did	 not	 wince.	 Those	 burning	 eyes
did	 not	 even	 flicker	 when	 an	 arrow	 hit	 the	 man	 riding	 behind	 him.	 He	 kept
staring	at	Aswathama	and	the	Brahmin	shuddered	at	the	hatred	emanating	from
the	depths	of	those	eyes.
There	was	just	a	couple	of	hundred	feet	to	go	to	escape	the	narrow	path.	“Hold
on!	Hold	on!”	Aswathama	urged	his	men	as	another	boulder	rolled	by	so	close
that	it	showered	them	with	powdery	ice.	Despite	the	men	Aswathama	had	taken
down,	Shakuni	had	dodged	the	arrows	with	an	ease	that	bordered	on	magical,
the	glint	of	madness	in	his	blue	eyes.	Another	shot	and	another	miss.	The	man
had	nine	lives.

Aswathama	 heard	 a	 huge	 crash	 behind	 him	 and	 looked	 back.	 A	 huge	 icecovered	boulder	had	fallen	onto	the	path,	cutting	off	their	retreat.
“Good	bye,	Brahmin!”	Shakuni’s	laughter	echoed	around	them.
Trapped!	 Aswathama	 felt	 panic-stricken,	 but	 he	 could	 not	 let	 down	 the	 dozen
surviving	men	with	him,	nor	his	country	or	Suyodhana.	‘Father!’	he	prayed	in
silent	despair.	The	smiling	face	of	Karna,	who	might	already	be	lying	dead	on
some	 battlefield	 in	 the	 South,	 flashed	 before	 his	 eyes.	 ‘Suyodhana,	 I	 have
earned	your	friendship,	perhaps	even	more	than	Karna,	for	I	chose	this	battle,
unlike	Karna,	whom	it	was	thrust	upon,’	muttered	Aswathama,	trying	to	 rally
his	thoughts.	If	he	had	to	die,	it	should	not	be	in	vain.	Something	had	to	be	done
to	finish	the	bastard	who	had	ruined	the	country.
Time	stood	still	as	another	arrow	struck	the	Brahmin	warrior.	He	scowled	in
pain	as	he	removed	the	two	arrows	from	his	shoulder.	Blood	gushed	from	the
wounds,	bright	against	the	pure	white	snow.	What	was	the	lesson	his	father	had
taught	 him	 about	 snowy	 mountains?	 It	 was	 something	 that	 had	 captured	 his
imagination	 as	 a	 child.	 Aswathama’s	 hands	 went	 to	 the	 sealed	 clay	 pot	 that
contained	powdered	sulphur	rock.	“Gandhakastra!”	he	bellowed,	ignoring	the
look	 of	 horror	 among	 his	 followers.	 The	 men	 immediately	 pulled	 out	 the
small	clay	pots	they	all	carried.
“It	won’t	be	enough	to	take	them	out,”	a	soldier	near	him	whispered.
“Not	all	of	them,”	Aswathama	agreed,	as	he	pulled	the	arrow	that	would	carry
the	small	clay	pot	to	its	destination,	from	his	quiver.	He	scanned	the	mountain
for	a	visible	crack	in	the	ice.	He	found	one,	unsure	whether	the	small	explosion
would	 trigger	 what	 he	 wanted.	 “Fire	 the	 Gandhakastra,”	 he	 shouted	 as	 his
arrow	arched	high	over	the	mountain.	It	was	followed	by	a	dozen	more	from
his	men.
“No!	Are	you	crazy,	you	bastard?”
It	 was	 good	 to	 hear	 the	 panic	 in	 Shakuni’s	 voice	 as	 his	 men	 scrambled	 back,
trying	to	retreat	along	the	slippery	trail.	They	were	men	of	the	mountains	and
knew	what	was	coming	as	the	mountain	rumbled	under	their	feet	and	the	horses
panicked.	 They	 knew	 nothing	 would	 survive	 in	 the	 path	 of	 the	 avalanche	 the

mad	Brahmin	had	triggered	with	his	explosive	arrows.
The	 mountain	 of	 snow	 started	 at	 a	 glacial	 pace	 at	 first,	 but	 soon	 gathered
frightening	momentum.	The	air	was	rent	with	the	sounds	of	panicked	neighing
of	horses	and	the	terrified	cries	of	men.
“Har	 Har	 Mahadeva!”	 Aswathama	 screamed	 as	 the	 mountain	 vibrated	 in
anger.
His	men	answered	in	full	throat.	They	waited	for	the	embrace	of	Shiva	as	the
mountain	came	rushing	towards	them.
*****

12			DIGVIJAYA
	
KARNA	 OPENED	 HIS	 EYES	 TO	 DARKNESS.	

‘Have	 I	 gone	 blind?’	 he	 wondered.
Pungent	 powders	 burnt	 his	 throat	 and	 he	 tried	 to	 cough	 out	 the	 bitterness.
Everything	was	silent.	‘My	life	cannot	end	like	this.	Oh,	Lord	Surya,	have	you
forsaken	me	at	my	death?’
From	a	small	crack,	water	came	trickling	in.	Water!	From	where	could	it	have
come?	 The	 river	 was	 some	 distance	 away,	 as	 Karna	 remembered;	 no	 water
could	flow	in.	He	used	all	his	strength	to	break	through	the	crack.	The	chariot
wobbled.	Had	it	become	lighter?	Water	was	seeping	in	from	the	ground	below.
There	 was	 the	 faint	 sound	 of	 rain	 splattering	 on	 water.	 ‘Surya!	 The	 river	 is
flooding.’	The	water	was	making	the	chariot	buoyant	but	it	was	also	rising	fast,
threatening	to	drown	him.
Karna	put	an	injured	hand	to	the	crack	and	tried	to	lift	the	heavy	chariot.	It	rose
a	little	and	then	crashed	back,	splashing	water	all	over	him.	He	could	hear	the
river	 fighting	 to	 push	 in.	 With	 all	 his	 might	 he	 pushed	 again	 and	 finally	 the
chariot	 toppled	 over	 with	 a	 huge	 splash.	 River	 water	 rushed	 to	 embrace	 him.
He	kicked	hard	and	came	up	to	the	roaring	surface	of	the	Narmada,	spluttering
and	coughing.	When	he	climbed	to	the	shore,	the	devastation	caused	by	the	war
elephants	was	a	shocking	sight.	Limbs	were	strewn	everywhere,	some	mashed
to	 a	 pulp.	 Carcasses	 of	 horses	 and	 men	 lay	 rotting,	 half-eaten	 by	 wolves	 and
crows.	A	few	men	stood	shivering	in	the	drizzle.	Who	had	won	the	battle?
Some	of	the	men	who	had	seen	Karna	climbing	out	of	the	river,	now	walked
towards	 him.	 The	 river	 was	 gobbling	 up	 the	 shore	 at	 an	 alarming	 rate	 and
Karna	waded	in	through	knee-deep	water.	It	had	been	dry	just	a	few	moments
before.	From	their	attire,	Karna	could	see	the	men	were	Kalinga	soldiers.	What
had	happened	to	the	soldiers	he	had	taken	on	loan	from	Jayadratha?	How	many
had	died?

A	 movement	 near	 him	 caught	 Karna’s	 attention.	 A	 half-broken	 chariot	 lay
buried	in	the	slushy	earth.	A	crow,	pecking	on	the	carcass	of	a	horse,	tilted	its
head	 and	 peered	 at	 Karna	 for	 a	 second	 before	 hopping	 away.	 Was	 there
someone	 pinned	 to	 the	 ground?	 As	 he	 moved	 closer,	 he	 could	 hear	 the
wheezing	sound	of	a	dying	man.	Karna	looked	down	and	a	familiar	face	stared
back.
“Suta,	if	you	value	your	life,	use	your	sword	to	end	my	agony....	If	you	do	not,
it	will	be	the	biggest	mistake	of	your	life...”
Uthayan	 lay	 under	 the	 rubble.	 Even	 at	 death’s	 door	 he	 remained	 defiant	 and
proud.	Such	brave	men	should	not	be	allowed	to	die.	Karna	put	his	shoulders	to
the	 toppled	 chariot	 and	 tried	 to	 move	 the	 weight	 crushing	 Uthayan.	 A	 few
soldiers	watching	him	from	a	distance,	ran	to	lend	their	support.	Together,	they
extricated	the	Chera	King.	Uthayan’s	hands	were	still	pinned	to	the	shaft	of	the
chariot.	Karna	extricated	his	arrows	from	Uthayan’s	palms,	feeling	the	pain	of
his	 foe.	 He	 stole	 a	 glance	 at	 Uthayan’s	 grim	 face,	 a	 small	 hope	 in	 his	 mind
craved	gratitude	from	his	old	foe	but	all	he	saw	in	the	eyes	of	the	man	he	was
saving	was	the	glint	of	unadulterated	hatred.	Uthayan	collapsed	on	the	earth	as
soon	 as	 his	 hands	 were	 freed	 and	 lay	 in	 a	 heap,	 wheezing	 with	 pain	 and
exhaustion	at	Karna’s	feet.
Soldiers	 on	 both	 sides	 whispered	 to	 each	 other	 about	 the	 valour	 of	 the	 Suta.
Awareness	 of	 his	 magnificent	 victory	 began	 sinking	 into	 Karna’s	 mind.	 He
could	 feel	 the	 rays	 of	 the	 rising	 sun	 on	 his	 shoulders,	 warming	 his	 tired
muscles	like	a	caress,	almost	like	a	blessing.	He	was	the	chosen	one	of	the	Sun
God.	 He	 smiled	 at	 the	 thought.	 ‘Suyodhana,	 I	 have	 done	 it!	 It	 will	 be	 fun	 to
watch	 Lord	 Bhishma’s	 face	 when	 this	 Suta	 enters	 the	 Sabha.	 Arjuna,	 are	 you
watching?	 A	 Suta,	 the	 son	 of	 a	 charioteer,	 has	 done	 the	 impossible.	 Krishna,
where	are	you?’
Karna	looked	at	the	carnage	around	him	and	then	up	at	the	heavens.	‘This	is	not
enough.	 Like	 the	 warriors	 of	 yore,	 I	 must	 conquer	 the	 whole	 earth	 –	 a
digvijaya	–	winning	victories	in	all	directions.	Suyodhana,	my	friend,	you	gave
me	 a	 tiny	 kingdom	 to	 rule	 but	 this	 Suta	 will	 repay	 you	 by	 giving	 you	 all	 of
Bharatavarsha.	Our	friendship	will	no	longer	be	based	on	your	charity.’
The	men	around	Karna	bowed	deeply	in	homage.	He	felt	powerful,	invincible,

and	immortal.
That	 evening,	 after	 cremating	 the	 dead,	 the	 Suta’s	 quest	 for	 digvijaya
commenced.	 Karna	 raced	 south,	 ignoring	 the	 proud	 King	 of	 an	 ancient	 race
sitting	 behind	 him.	 Nor	 was	 there	 any	 thought	 in	 the	 Suta’s	 mind	 about	 the
outstanding	 valour	 shown	 by	 a	 Brahmin	 warrior	 from	 Kalinga.	 The	 fine
equestrian	 who	 had	 made	 his	 victory	 possible	 lay	 burnt	 to	 ashes	 on	 the
cremation	pyre.	Such	things	did	not	matter	to	Karna	now.	He	was	chasing	his
destiny.
The	 news	 of	 their	 rout	 at	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 Suta	 reached	 Parashurama	 much
before	 Karna	 did.	 When	 his	 aides	 asked	 him	 whether	 they	 should	 prepare	 to
defend	the	city,	Parashurama	answered,	“No,	invite	Karna	to	my	chamber.	We
will	offer	no	resistance.”
As	 his	 surprised	 subordinates	 withdrew,	 murmuring	 to	 each	 other,
Parashurama	sat	wondering	whether	his	gamble	would	work.	If	it	did,	it	would
be	 the	 greatest	 victory	 of	 his	 life.	 The	 North	 would	 be	 conquered	 without
spilling	a	drop	of	blood.
The	temple	outside	was	closing	after	the	night	prayers.	Parashurama	folded	his
hands	 in	 prayer	 as	 the	 last	 bell	 and	 prayer	 sounded	 and	 the	 doors	 of	 the
garbagriha	closed	with	a	screech.	Let	the	Suta	come.	He	did	not	know	what	lay
in	store	for	him.	Parashurama	smiled	grimly	to	himself.
*****

13			THE	FEAST
	
ASWATHAMA	 AWOKE	 SCREAMING	 IN	 PAIN.	

He	 could	 not	 open	 his	 eyes.	 He
panicked,	thinking	he	had	gone	blind.	He	could	not	recollect	where	he	was	or
why.	 It	 took	him	a	 while	to	realize	that	ropes	bound	his	hands	to	a	pole	 high
above	his	head.	A	fire	burned	nearby,	throwing	grotesque	shadows	all	around.
It	was	bone-chillingly	cold	despite	the	flames.	A	bearded	man	walked	up	to	him
and	threw	scalding	water	onto	his	face.	Aswathama	groaned.	The	group	of	men
around	him	laughed.	Where	were	his	men,	those	brave	souls	who	had	trusted
him	on	this	suicidal	mission?	He	strained	to	see	his	companions.
“Where	are	my	men?”	Aswathama	whispered,	swallowing	the	scathing	pain	in
his	throat;	his	face	felt	on	fire.
“You	 want	 to	 know	 where	 your	 men	 are,	 Brahmin?	 Don’t	 you	 want	 to	 know
how	many	of	our	brethren	were	killed	in	the	avalanche?”
Aswathama	smiled.	The	bearded	man	slapped	him	across	his	face,	cutting	his
lip.	Aswathama	cocked	his	head	to	one	side,	spat	out	some	blood	and	asked,	“Is
the	Mlecha	dead?”
Instantly	 men	 sprang	 up	 with	 swords	 drawn.	 The	 bearded	 man	 kicked
Aswathama	 viciously.	 “You	 filthy	 pig!	 You	 dare	 call	 our	 King	 Mlecha?”	 His
companions	joined	in	kicking	their	prisoner.
“Enough!”	 a	 familiar	 voice	 commanded.	 Immediately	 the	 torment	 ceased.
Aswathama	raised	his	bloodied	face	to	see	Shakuni	standing	a	few	feet	away,
supporting	himself	on	a	long	stick.	His	gaze	dropped	to	Shakuni’s	knees	and	he
smiled	again.	The	Gandharan	limped	towards	the	Brahmin.	On	either	side	men
stood	respectfully	with	bowed	heads.	In	a	voice	more	frightening	for	its	calm,
the	Gandhara	Prince	said,	“You	have	killed	more	than	3000	Gandharans.	You
have	made	me	lame	for	life.”

“I	am	sorry	I	couldn’t	do	more,”	Aswathama	replied.
Shakuni	 began	 to	 laugh.	 “I	 have	 killed	 all	 your	 men.	 I	 could	 have	 killed	 you
too,	 like	 a	 fly.”	 His	 face	 was	 inches	 away	 as	 he	 traced	 a	 line	 across
Aswathama’s	throat	with	his	finger.	“Do	you	know	why	I	spared	you,	Brahmin?
I	wanted	you	to	see	how	I	am	going	to	destroy	your	country.”
“Stop	blabbering,	Mlecha.	You	cannot	even	take	one	step	beyond	the	Indus.	You
are	a	wanted	man.	I	will	die	with	the	satisfaction	that	Suyodhana	will	hunt	you
down	one	day.”
“Spare	your	breath,	Aswathama.	The	dice	has	just	started	to	roll.	The	game	is
not	over.	Not	yet,	not	so	quickly,	not	so	easily.”
“It	 will	 be,	 when	 the	 Hastinapura	 imperial	 army	 marches	 in.	 Have	 you
forgotten	what	Lord	Bhishma	did	to	your	precious	country?	When	Suyodhana
comes,	you	will	wish	Bhishma	had	come	instead.”
Shakuni’s	 face	 darkened	 at	 the	 mention	 of	 Bhishma.	 “Hmm,	 let	 my	 nephew
come.	I	want	him	to	come.	I	want	his	friends	to	come	too.	I	want	all	of	India	to
come.”	 Turning	 to	 his	 companions,	 the	 Gandharan	 said,	 “Kill	 the	 goats.	 My
nephew	will	be	visiting	us	soon.	Bring	the	soma.	Let	us	celebrate.”
While	 his	 men	 ran	 to	 fetch	 the	 goats	 and	 threw	 more	 wood	 into	 the	 fire,
Shakuni	moved	back	to	Aswathama.	He	spoke	in	a	voice	as	cold	as	it	was	soft.
“Don’t	gloat	over	the	few	victories	your	countrymen	have	won.	You	breed	like
pigs	and	have	a	bigger	army,	but	ultimately	victory	will	be	ours.	The	day	is	not
far	 when	 we	 will	 rule	 you.	 Do	 you	 want	 to	 know	 why,	 son	 of	 a	 cursed
Brahmin?”	 Aswathama	 glared	 back	 at	 the	 foreigner,	 furious	 at	 his	 own
impotence.	Soon,	the	smell	of	roasted	meat	filled	the	air.	The	Brahmin	crinkled
his	nose	in	disgust.	Someone	began	playing	a	string	instrument	and	drums	kept
beat	 to	 the	 strange	 music.	 Some	 of	 the	 men	 began	 dancing,	 embracing	 and
kissing	 each	 other ’s	 cheeks.	 Soma	 flowed	 freely.	 Women	 who	 had	 become
widows	 just	 a	 few	 days	 before,	 and	 mothers	 who	 had	 lost	 their	 sons	 in	 the
avalanche,	now	danced	with	reckless	abandon.	Aswathama	watched	the	strange
customs	 of	 the	 Gandharans	 with	 distaste.	 What	 sort	 of	 society	 was	 this	 that
celebrated	 even	 in	 death?	 It	 was	 the	 antithesis	 of	 everything	 his	 father	 had
taught	him.	The	Gandharans	lived	in	the	moment,	without	bothering	about	the

afterlife	 or	 the	 eternal	 soul.	 For	 them,	 there	 was	 no	 moksha,	 sanyas	 or
brahmacharya.	There	were	no	seekers	or	philosophers	in	their	midst.	Life	was
now.
When	 the	 meat	 had	 cooked,	 they	 dropped	 the	 roasted	 chunks	 into	 a	 big	 bowl
and	mixed	it	with	rice.	They	devoured	the	food,	dipping	their	hands	in	the	large
bowl	 as	 they	 ate	 together.	 There	 was	 no	 difference	 between	 rich	 and	 poor,
prince	 and	 pauper.	 They	 were	 one;	 eating,	 drinking,	 dancing,	 thinking	 and
acting	 as	 one.	 The	 Mlecha	 had	 said	 they	 would	 rule	 Bharata	 one	 day.	 As
Aswathama	watched	the	Gandharans	up	close,	the	Mlecha’s	words	held	a	ring
of	 truth.	 Bharatavarsha,	 despite	 its	 great	 warriors,	 its	 ancient	 civilization	 and
refined	 culture,	 its	 accomplishments	 in	 art,	 science	 and	 architecture,	 would
collapse	like	a	house	of	cards	before	the	onslaught	of	something	as	primeval
as	the	force	he	was	witnessing.	A	country	obsessed	with	who	was	touchable	and
who	 was	 not,	 who	 could	 eat	 with	 whom,	 who	 could	 love	 whom,	 who	 could
stand	 how	 many	 feet	 from	 whom,	 and	 who	 could	 learn	 what,	 did	 not	 stand	 a
chance	before	a	people	who	ate	from	the	same	bowl.
As	 the	 temperature	 dropped	 further	 and	 the	 icy	 wind	 from	 the	 Hindu	 Kush
shrieked	around	them,	the	dancing	grew	ever	more	frenzied	and	wild.
Shakuni	approached	Aswathama	with	a	chunk	of	goat	meat	and	thrust	it	in	his
face.	 “Eat!”	 he	 commanded,	 his	 eyes	 challenging	 the	 Brahmin.	 Aswathama
turned	his	face	away.	Shakuni	howled	with	laughter.	“What	luxury	your	people
have.	You	can	choose	what	to	eat	and	what	to	avoid.	Your	land	is	fertile.	Here,
if	we	are	lucky	we	get	to	eat	sometimes.	We	cannot	afford	customs	about	who
can	eat	what.	What	we	get,	we	eat	together.”	Shakuni	tore	off	a	chunk	of	meat
with	his	teeth.	The	cultivated	manners	that	he	had	exhibited	in	Hastinapura	had
vanished.	 He	 laughed	 at	 Aswathama’s	 expression	 of	 distaste.	 “Ours	 is	 a	 warravaged	country;	it	has	been	raped	and	pillaged.	Gandhara!	We	are	the	children
of	a	lesser	God.	Just	wait	and	watch	what	I	am	going	to	do	to	you	and	yours,
Brahmin.”
“Dream	on,	Mlecha.	The	imperial	army	is	five	lakh	strong.”
“You	are	amusing,	Aswathama.	Are	you	thinking	I	will	fight	my	nephew?	Oh,
no.	I	want	him	to	win.”	Shakuni	fished	out	a	gem	from	the	folds	of	his	clothing.
It	 shone	 brilliantly	 in	 the	 firelight.	 It	 was	 the	 most	 beautiful	 gemstone

Aswathama	 had	 ever	 seen.	 “Do	 you	 know	 what	 this	 is,	 Brahmin?	 This	 is	 my
gift	 to	 Suyodhana.”	 Shakuni	 held	 it	 close	 to	 Aswathama’s	 eyes.	 The	 lustre	 of
the	gem	was	blinding.	“For	all	its	beauty,	this	stone	is	said	to	bring	misfortune
and	disaster.	I	am	going	to	bestow	it	upon	my	nephew	as	a	reward	for	sparing
my	life.	Perhaps	you	think	it	is	all	superstition?	You	are	free	to	think	what	you
wish,	 but	 know	 this,	 not	 two	 months	 after	 my	 father	 got	 this	 stone	 from	 a
Yavana,	Bhishma	invaded	our	land.	See	what	it	did	to	our	country.	Now	watch
what	it	will	do	to	yours.”	Shakuni	laughed.
“You	talk	nonsense.	Stones	do	not	decide	destiny.	We	do.”
“Wait	 and	 see,	 young	 man.	 Just	 wait	 and	 see.”	 Leaning	 on	 his	 stick,	 Shakuni
limped	back	to	watch	the	dancing.
Aswathama	 wondered	 what	 the	 conniving	 Mlecha	 had	 implied.	 He	 wanted
Suyodhana	to	win.	He	wanted	to	gift	him	one	of	the	most	precious	gems	in	the
world.	Why?	The	bastard!	If	Suyodhana	took	it,	it	would	mean	he	had	forgiven
his	uncle	and	Shakuni	could	worm	his	way	back.	The	gem	was	worth	the	entire
treasury	 of	 Hastinapura.	 Perhaps	 there	 was	 also	 some	 truth	 about	 it	 bringing
disaster.	That	was	no	doubt	the	reason	why	Bhishma	had	not	taken	it	when	he
invaded	Gandhara	all	those	years	ago.	Such	a	possession	would	have	made	the
kingdom	vulnerable.
Shakuni	was	gambling	again.	The	stone	was	tempting	enough	to	be	stolen	but	it
would	 make	 its	 possessor	 insecure	 enough	 to	 be	 paranoid.	 It	 would	 beckon
invaders	 and	 plunderers	 to	 his	 land.	 Aswathama	 fervently	 wished	 Suyodhana
would	not	come	in	search	of	him.	Knowing	his	friend,	he	was	sure	that	one	day
or	the	other,	the	Prince	would	come.	That	would	be	the	worst	thing	that	could
happen	to	his	country.	For	the	first	time	since	his	capture,	Aswathama	wept.
*****

14 			GURU	AND	DISCIPLE
	
KARNA’S	ARMY	SMASHED	THE	LAST	Confederate	defences	and	rushed	deep	into	the

South.	In	his	chariot,	the	Chera	King	sat	bound	in	chains,	as	Karna	conquered
the	 kingdoms	 one	 by	 one.	 Like	 the	 sun	 dispelling	 darkness,	 Karna	 aimed	 to
carry	 the	 torch	 of	 progress	 to	 the	 Southern	 Confederate,	 which	 slept	 in	 the
shadows	of	orthodoxy	and	caste.	The	Suta’s	mission	was	to	remind	an	ancient
culture	 about	 the	 equality	 of	 all	 men,	 which	 emperors	 like	 Mahabali	 and
Ravana	had	proclaimed	at	the	dawn	of	civilization.	The	juggernaut	of	Karna’s
army	rolled	on,	deeper	and	deeper	into	the	Confederate,	conquering	kingdoms,
toppling	 empires,	 and	 destroying	 the	 plague	 of	 inequality	 and	 caste	 hatred.
Karna’s	 mammoth	 army	 rushed	 to	 Muzaris	 after	 sacking	 Kanchipuram	 and
Madurai.	The	last	remnants	of	the	terrified	Chera	army	awaited	the	great	Suta
warrior ’s	march	into	their	ancient	city	with	their	king	bound	in	chains.
“Suta,	kill	me	but	do	not	keep	me	chained	like	an	animal.”
Karna	ignored	Uthayan’s	plea.	He	had	no	time	to	pander	to	the	sensibilities	of
his	 vanquished	 foe.	 He	 had	 spared	 his	 life	 and	 that	 was	 a	 great	 thing.	 As	 his
army	crossed	the	hills	and	marched	towards	Muzaris,	his	heart	leapt	with	joy.
He	suddenly	remembered	how	he	had	first	arrived	in	this	city,	a	terrified	young
boy.	 How	 it	 had	 changed	 over	 the	 years!	 On	 either	 side	 of	 the	 road,	 people
silently	watched	him	ride	past	them.	No	one	waved.	He	could	see	the	glistening
spire	 of	 Parashurama’s	 palace	 and	 the	 silver	 sheet	 of	 sea	 beyond.	 The	 sight
unleashed	long-suppressed	emotions	in	his	heart.	Karna’s	felt	salty	tears	in	his
throat	as	he	stared	ahead,	his	gaze	unwavering.	‘My	Guru,	have	you	forgiven
this	seeker	of	knowledge?’
“Suta,	your	deceit	almost	took	our	revered	Guru	to	the	gates	of	Yamaloka.	He
is	just	recovering.	Don’t	you	dare	play	with	his	life	again,	you	son	of	a	lowcaste,”	Uthayan	threatened	through	gritted	teeth,	rattling	his	chains	in	anger.

Karna	looked	back	at	Uthayan	and	smiled.	“No	one	knows	my	Guru	better	than
I	do,	Your	Highness.”	He	jumped	down	before	the	chariot	had	come	to	a	halt
and	 ran	 up	 the	 Palace	 steps.	 He	 could	 hear	 his	 soldiers	 dragging	 out	 the
vanquished	Chera	King,	but	he	did	not	pause	to	watch.	Such	things	could	wait.
He	saw	the	priests	move	away	as	he	walked	in.	Karna	was	pleased	that	he	could
instil	so	much	respect	in	them.	The	fruits	of	victory	were	sweet.
“Suta,	stop!	Do	not	pollute	the	holy	abode	of	the	Guru!”	Uthayan	shouted	from
where	he	stood,	a	King	held	captive	in	his	own	palace.
It	struck	Karna	like	a	blow	from	a	gadha	that	the	priests	had	moved	away	from
him	not	out	of	respect,	but	in	fear	of	the	pollution	a	low-caste	like	him	could
cause	 their	 high-caste	 souls.	 Karna	 felt	 helplessness	 wash	 over	 him.	 All	 his
insecurities	 about	 being	 born	 the	 son	 of	 a	 charioteer	 raised	 their	 heads	 once
again.	 He	 had	 vanquished	 the	 Southern	 Confederate,	 yet	 he	 remained	 a	 mere
Suta?
A	group	of	priests	stood	at	the	 door	chanting	mantras,	daring	 the	Suta	to	cut
off	 their	 heads	 before	 they	 allowed	 him	 to	 enter	 his	 Guru’s	 presence.	 Karna
knew	all	his	valour	did	not	matter	in	these	dark	rooms.	How	could	he	use	force
against	these	unarmed	men?	He	was	a	Kshatriya	by	karma.	He	swallowed	the
lump	lodged	like	a	stone	in	his	throat.	How	long	could	he	resist	the	pressures
of	society?
“I	wish	to	ask	my	Guru’s	forgiveness,	respected	Brahmins.	Kindly	make	way.”
Karna	sank	to	his	knees	and	bowed	low.
The	 murmuring	 stopped	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 then	 started	 again,	 this	 time	 the
priests	 vigorously	 debating	 among	 themselves.	 ‘He	 is	 a	 cheat,	 do	 not	 believe
the	Suta.	The	Guru’s	holy	presence	should	not	be	defiled.’
Karna	 heard	 the	 chained	 Chera	 King	 command	 the	 priests	 not	 to	 let	 him
through,	 but	 he	 remained	 on	 his	 knees.	 He	 was	 tempted	 to	 get	 up	 and	 behave
like	the	victor	he	was.	He	could	have	pushed	these	chattering	men	to	one	side
with	 laughable	 ease	 and	 walked	 into	 his	 Guru’s	 room.	 Within,	 Parashurama
coughed	and	Karna’s	heart	skipped	a	beat.	One	of	the	priests	went	in.	The	Suta
remained	kneeling	like	a	supplicant	before	the	Brahmins.

It	took	an	eternity	for	the	priest	to	return	but	when	he	did,	he	indicated	the	Suta
was	 to	 enter.	 Karna	 remained	 in	 the	 same	 position,	 his	 head	 bowed	 in	 silent
prayer.	 Through	 his	 shut	 eyes,	 a	 few	 tears	 fell	 to	 the	 floor.	 He	 did	 not	 wish
them	 to	 see	 how	 vulnerable	 he	 was.	 A	 priest	 remarked	 that	 the	 Guru	 did	 not
have	 all	 day.	 Uthayan	 protested	 loudly,	 insisting	 that	 he	 be	 taken	 to	 the	 Guru
first.	 Wearily,	 Karna	 stood	 up	 and	 walked	 into	 the	 room	 where	 his	 Guru	 lay.
The	priests	scrambled	away	lest	he	pollute	them.
The	 room	 was	 in	 darkness	 and	 it	 took	 Karna	 a	 moment	 to	 locate	 the	 frail
figure	on	the	cot.	He	was	shocked	to	see	Guru	Parashurama.	He	wished	he	had
not	 come.	 The	 broad-shouldered	 warrior	 with	 long	 muscular	 limbs	 had
vanished,	 leaving	 a	 frail	 imitation	 in	 his	 place.	 ‘What	 have	 I	 done	 to	 him?’
Karna	 thought	 in	 silent	 horror	 as	 Parashurama’s	 frail	 form	 was	 racked	 by
coughing.	 Finally	 the	 Guru	 gestured	 for	 Karna	 to	 approach.	 Parashurama
raised	 a	 hand	 to	 touch	 Karna	 and	 then	 hesitated	 a	 moment,	 remembering	 that
his	favourite	disciple	was	nothing	more	than	a	Suta	and	his	fingers	would	be
defiled	by	touching	him.	Karna	felt	like	a	knife	had	been	stabbed	into	his	heart.
He	was	about	to	turn	away	bitterly,	when	Guru	Parashurama’s	shivering	palm
came	to	rest	on	his	bowed	head.
Karna	 closed	 his	 eyes,	 his	 heart	 full.	 Like	 a	 child	 seeking	 his	 father ’s
forgiveness	for	a	transgression,	Karna	wept,	his	head	on	the	Guru’s	chest.	The
old	man’s	fingers	caressed	 his	head	 affectionately.	In	that	moment,	they	 were
not	 a	 Suta	 and	 his	 exalted	 Brahmin	 warrior-Guru,	 but	 father	 and	 son.
Boundaries	 of	 caste	 and	 prejudice	 did	 not	 matter.	 Karna	 wished	 the	 moment
would	 never	 end.	 He	 could	 hear	 the	 soft	 beating	 of	 his	 Guru’s	 heart.	 ‘Has	 he
forgiven	 me?’	 the	 son	 of	 the	 charioteer	 wondered.	 Slowly	 he	 raised	 his	 head
and	saw	the	tears	in	his	Guru’s	eyes.
“Karna,	the	path	you	have	chosen	is	the	wrong	one,”	Parashurama	whispered.
Karna	stood	up,	his	hands	shivering	with	emotion.	“Guru,	I	...”
“No,	I	am	not	referring	to	you	lying	to	me	about	your	caste.	Had	you	not	lied
and	 become	 my	 disciple,	 I	 would	 never	 have	 known	 you,	 my	 son.	 I	 forgave
you	 long	 ago.”	 Parashurama	 paused,	 trying	 to	 catch	 his	 breath.	 Then	 he	 said
hoarsely,	“I	speak	of	the	company	you	are	keeping.	You	are	the	Dharmaveera.
Why	then	have	you	befriended	Duryodhana?”

Karna’s	 heart	 skipped	 a	 beat.	 He	 prayed	 fervently	 that	 his	 Guru	 would	 not
demand	he	leave	his	friend.	He	knew	he	had	to	defend	Suyodhana	but	somehow
the	words	deserted	his	tongue.
“Karna,	he	is	evil.	He	does	not	respect	tradition	and	he	will	pay	the	price	for	it.
You	are	not	what	you	think	you	are.	Your	destiny	is	different.	I	am	bound	by	a
promise,	else	I	would	have	told	you.”
Karna	was	perplexed,	but	he	knew	he	would	never	betray	Suyodhana.	‘He	was
the	 only	 one	 who	 supported	 me	 when	 the	 whole	 world	 was	 making	 fun	 of	 a
Suta	who	dared	to	dream	of	being	a	warrior,’	he	wanted	to	say,	but	the	words
were	trapped	in	his	throat.
“Your	destiny	lies	with	the	Pandavas.	Go,	ask	Yudhishtra	for	forgiveness.”
“No!”	Karna	stood	up	abruptly.	This	longed-for	meeting	had	turned	bitter.	How
could	 his	 Guru	 even	 suggest	 such	 a	 thing?	 He,	 Karna,	 befriend	 that	 arrogant
Arjuna?	“Guru,	forgive	me,	but	I	could	never	forsake	Suyodhana...”
“Karna,	my	son,	you	will	regret	it	later.”
“I	would	rather	be	known	as	evil,	than	ungrateful.”
Parashurama	sighed.	Silence	filled	the	room	like	a	thick	fog.	Karna	yearned	to
leave	the	room	and	get	away	from	the	old	man	who	was	asking	him	to	befriend
his	arch	rival	and	betray	his	best	friend.	How	could	he	even	think	such	a	thing?
‘It	 would	 have	 been	 better	 that	 he	 did	 not	 forgive	 me,	 and	 chased	 me	 away
calling	me	a	Suta,’	Karna	thought	sadly.
“Karna,	will	you	promise	this	old	man	something?”
“Anything,	Guru,	anything	except	betraying	Suyodhana.”
“You	have	destroyed	the	Southern	Confederate	and	all	these	kingdoms	are	now
vassal	 states	 of	 Hastinapura.	 The	 people	 of	 these	 lands	 follow	 an	 ancient
culture	and	traditions.	Your	friend	may	try	to	impose	his	newfound	ideas	here
too.	I	fear	that	renegade	Brahmin,	Kripa,	will	assist	him	in	doing	so.	In	these
lands,	 learning	 is	 respected,	 the	 Vedas	 are	 followed,	 and	 Brahmins	 are
considered	God’s	people.	Everyone	knows	their	place.	Society	is	stable.	Keep

your	 evil	 friend	 away	 from	 here.”	 Another	 bout	 of	 coughing	 cut	 short	 the
Guru’s	words.	Karna	stood	in	silence,	his	heart	and	mind	in	turmoil.
“The	 way	 to	 earn	 the	 respect	 of	 the	 Brahmins	 is	 not	 by	 brute	 force,	 but	 by
being	righteous.	As	a	King,	you	should	know	how	to	respect	learning.	It	is	not
your	caste	that	is	standing	in	the	way	of	you	gaining	people’s	respect,	but	your
rebellious	 attitude.	 There	 are	 enough	 examples	 of	 men	 from	 various	 varnas
becoming	 King,	 but	 they	 all	 respected	 our	 traditions.	 Even	 now,	 it	 is	 not	 too
late.	Promise	me	that	you	will	never	deny	a	Brahmin	anything	he	asks,	that	you
will	treat	our	traditions	with	respect,	and	promise	me	that	you	will	keep	your
friend	away	from	these	holy	lands...”
“But	 Guru,	 I	 will	 still	 be	 treated	 as	 a	 Suta	 all	 my	 life.”	 Karna	 regretted	 the
words	as	soon	as	he	spoke	them.
A	smile	flickered	on	Parashurama’s	lips.	“My	blessing	will	always	be	with	you.
My	blessings	still	go	a	long	way	across	Bharatavarsha.	Remember	my	words
and	see	how	you	will	be	treated.	You	can	earn	respect	in	two	ways	–	by	force
or	by	deeds.	The	choice	is	yours.	Either	way,	you	will	be	remembered.”
Doubt	started	gnawing	at	Karna’s	mind.	Was	this	a	blessing	or	a	bargain?	Did	it
really	 matter	 whether	 a	 few	 priests	 respected	 him?	 His	 duty	 was	 toward	 his
friend.	 Then	 why	 was	 the	 Guru’s	 offer	 so	 tempting?	 Throughout	 his	 life,	 he
had	 faced	 scorn	 for	 being	 a	 Suta,	 and	 now...	 “I	 promise	 I	 will	 never	 deny	 a
Brahmin	 what	 he	 asks.	 I	 will	 respect	 our	 traditions	 and	 culture.	 I...I	 am	 a
Kshatriya...”
“You	are,	my	son,	whether	the	world	knows	it	or	not.	I	know	there	is	no	one
more	 Kshatriya	 than	 you.	 It	 would	 have	 been	 better	 for	 you	 to	 join	 the
Pandavas.	 Perhaps	 you	 will	 when	 the	 time	 comes	 and	 you	 know	 the	 truth.
Come,	let	me	embrace	you.”
Karna	moved	towards	the	old	man,	bending	gracefully	over	the	supine	figure
in	the	bed.	The	Guru	affectionately	ran	his	fingers	over	Karna’s	thick	hair	for	a
long	 time.	 “I	 cursed	 you	 that	 day.	 I	 must	 make	 amends,	 Karna.”	 Parashurama
said,	trying	to	sit	up.	He	fell	back	in	exhaustion	as	someone	tapped	on	the	door.
“Open	the	door,”	he	said	to	Karna,	short	of	breath.	A	few	Brahmins	came	in,
eyeing	the	Suta	suspiciously.	“Where	is	Uthayan?”	Parashurama	asked.

The	Brahmins	looked	at	each	other,	embarrassed.	Uthayan	walked	in,	his	hands
in	chains,	but	his	head	erect	and	proud,	even	in	defeat.
“You	 tied	 him	 like	 a	 slave,	 Karna?”	 Parashurama	 asked	 and	 then	 began	 to
laugh,	but	his	laughter	quickly	turned	into	coughing.
Karna	 saw	 Uthayan’s	 shoulders	 slump	 and	 he	 felt	 compassion	 for	 the	 Chera
King	stir	in	his	heart.
“Free	him,”	Parashurama	ordered.
Karna	moved	to	unchain	the	King.	Uthayan	hissed	in	his	ear,	“You	will	pay	for
this!”	 Karna	 ignored	 him.	 The	 chains	 fell	 in	 heaps	 and	 Uthayan	 stepped	 free.
“Luck	was	with	the	Suta.”	He	bowed	to	the	Guru.
“Suta	 he	 may	 be	 to	 you,	 but	 to	 me	 he	 is	 the	 best	 Kshatriya	 in	 all	 of
Bharatavarsha.”	 Uthayan	 and	 the	 group	 of	 priests	 gasped	 in	 surprise.	 “Why
look	so	surprised?	Here	is	my	order,	ensure	that	it	is	carried	through	the	entire
length	 and	 breadth	 of	 Bharatavarsha:	 as	 long	 as	 Karna	 keeps	 his	dharma	 and
his	 promise	 of	 never	 denying	 anything	 asked	 by	 a	 Brahmin,	 as	 long	 as	 he
worships	 the	 smritis	 and	 Vedas,	 he	 is	 to	 be	 accorded	 the	 respect	 due	 to	 a
Kshatriya.	 To	 mark	 this	 pledge,	 I	 gift	 him	 the	 bhargava	 astra	 and	 my	 bow,
Vijaya.”
“No!”	Uthayan	shouted.	“But	Guru,	why?”
Karna	himself	was	shocked	by	the	gesture.	Did	the	weapon	really	exist?	He	had
heard	rumours	about	the	weapon,	a	missile	of	tremendous	explosive	power.	It
was	said	to	be	a	yantra	muktha,	to	be	released	from	a	chariot.	As	a	student	of
Parashurama,	he	had	asked	him	about	the	weapon	many	times	but	the	Guru	had
never	given	him	an	answer.
“I	 forged	 the	 weapon	 with	 my	 own	 hands.	 Scores	 of	 master	 craftsmen	 have
worked	on	it	for	more	than	a	dozen	years.	There	is	nothing	more	beautiful	and
fearsome	as	this	astra,”	Parashurama	said	with	pride.
“Guru,	you	cannot	give	it	to	this	Suta.	You	are	our	mentor,	our	Guru.	We	have
always	 been	 loyal	 to	 you.	 Why	 are	 you	 giving	 the	 most	 prized	 possession	 to
this	 low-caste	 impostor	 from	 the	 North?”	 Uthayan’s	 voice	 was	 shrill	 with

agitation.
Parashurama	 tried	 to	 answer,	 but	 a	 bout	 of	 coughing	 caught	 him	 unawares.
Karna	could	see	the	look	of	shock	in	the	eyes	of	the	Brahmins.	The	bhargava
astra,	the	most	feared	weapon	in	the	entire	country!	He	could	hardly	believe	he
was	 to	 possess	 it.	 Unbidden,	 Arjuna’s	 face	 came	 to	 his	 mind.	 Karna	 smiled
despite	himself.
“Have	you	forgotten	the	vow	of	your	ancestors,	Guru?	Have	you	forgotten	that
for	 twenty-four	 generations,	 your	 clan	 has	 killed	 Kshatriyas?	 Parashurama
brought	 the	 wisdom	 of	 Brahminical	 rule	 to	 the	 country	 and	 now	 you	 are
supporting	 a	 low-caste	 who	 lied	 to	 you,	 cheated,	 and	 insulted	 the	 Southern
Kings.	The	entire	Asura	country	has	bowed	to	your	wisdom,	treating	you	like	a
God.	Guru,	this	is	unjust.	You	are	giving	the	best	to	this	Suta.”
“King	Uthayan,	a	man	who	has	failed	in	battle	has	no	right	to	speak.	Had	you
won	 against	 Karna,	 I	 would	 have	 considered	 you	 more	 worthy.	 But	 you	 lost
and	surrendered	Bharatavarsha	to	Karna.	I	have	forgiven	his	sin	against	me.	As
a	man	of	honour,	he	has	promised	to	uphold	dharma.”
“I	will	not	deny	a	Brahmin	whatever	he	asks,”	Karna	repeated	quietly.
Parashurama	asked	one	 of	 the	priests	to	take	Karna	to	the	secret	place	where
the	 astra	 was	 kept.	 Karna	 bowed	 deeply	 to	 the	 Guru.	 He	 saw	 the	 hatred	 in
Uthayan’s	 eyes.	 How	 bitter-sweet	 was	 this	 victory!	 Despite	 their	 enmity,	 he
admired	 and	 respected	 Uthayan’s	 qualities	 as	 a	 proud	 King	 and	 fearless
warrior.	Silently,	Karna	turned	and	followed	the	priest.
***
When	the	door	had	closed,	Uthayan	said	to	the	Guru.	“I	have	failed.	Allow	me
to	end	my	worthless	life,	Guru.”
Parashurama	 remained	 silent	 for	 a	 long	 time,	 staring	 far	 away	 through	 the
window.	 Uthayan	 bowed	 and	 was	 about	 to	 leave,	 when	 the	 Guru	 called	 him
softly.
“Son,	only	the	battle	is	lost,	not	the	war.	Astras	do	not	win	wars,	strategy	does.
We	are	fighting	for	a	bigger	cause.	Have	you	not	understood	what	I	have	done?

No,	I	was	not	being	a	hypocrite.	Karna	is	like	a	son	to	me,	dearer	than	anyone
else	in	the	world.	Nevertheless,	my	gift	to	him	has	nothing	to	do	with	that	love.
It	is	an	act	of	war.	Think	and	you	will	understand.”
“Guru...”	 Uthayan	 protested;	 then	 a	 wide	 smile	 appeared	 on	 his	 dark,	 warscarred	face.	“Guru,	my	respects!	It	is	brilliant.	“
Parashurama’s	laugh	brought	on	another	bout	of	coughing.	When	it	subsided,
Parashurama	 looked	 out	 of	 the	 window	 and	 smiled.	 The	 auspicious	 sound	 of
conch	shell	reverberated	in	the	air.	He	could	almost	smell	the	incense	and	his
heart	 leapt	 with	 joy	 when	 he	 heard	 the	 pealing	 of	 the	 temple	 bells.	 Outside,
under	a	shining	sun,	his	dear	disciple	was	paying	his	obeisance	to	the	priests	by
prostrating	himself	on	the	ground.	The	priests	stood	a	few	feet	away	from	the
Suta,	who	was	still	not	allowed	inside	the	temple,	yet	it	was	a	start.	Times	were
changing	and	one	could	not	always	expect	the	same	people	to	rule	always.	If	an
idea	was	to	survive,	it	had	to	adapt	with	the	times	–	bend	but	not	break,	show	it
was	 changing,	 yet	 never	 really	 change.	 Sometimes	 even	 Kripa’s	 philosophy
made	 sense.	 The	 accident	 of	 birth	 could	 not	 stand	 in	 the	 way	 of	 anyone
becoming	King	or	kingmaker.	Even	a	Suta	could	be	King,	especially	when	he
had	defeated	an	entire	army.	The	only	thing	was	to	ensure	that,	irrespective	of
the	lineage	of	the	ruler,	he	paid	obeisance	to	tradition	and	caste.	Then	he	could
be	elevated	as	a	Kshatriya.	Was	that	not	dharma?
‘Poor	fool,’	Parashurama	thought,	looking	at	Uthayan’s	dark	face.	‘Once,	your
ancestors	 fought	 us,	 and	 see	 what	 happened.	 A	 few	 Asuras	 like	 Ravana	 and
Mahabali	 had	 to	 be	 killed	 or	 banished,	 and	 now	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 die	 for	 us.
What	is	a	mere	Suta	compared	to	giants	like	them?	But	we	must	ensure	that	the
audacious	son	of	the	blind	King	stays	away	from	the	emancipated	lands	of	the
South.	The	promise	extracted	from	the	ambitious	Suta	will	come	in	handy	one
day,	 when	 the	 life	 and	 death	 of	 a	 civilisation	 will	 hang	 in	 the	 balance.	 Karna
conquered	the	Confederate	physically,	but	who	won	the	spiritual	victory?	Look
at	 who	 is	 lying	 prostrate	 at	 whose	 feet?	 Who	 is	 the	 victor	 and	 who	 the
vanquished?	 Karna,	 my	 son,	 you	 are	 just	 beginning	 to	 know	 what	 is	 dharma
and	adharma.	Dharmaveera	Karna,	when	the	time	comes,	have	the	courage	and
conviction	 to	 renounce	 your	 evil	 friend	 Duryodhana	 and	 join	 Dharmaputra
Yudhishtra	in	his	great	cause.	After	all,	Pandavas	are	your	brothers	in	faith.’
Rebels	like	Karna	could	be	managed	and	manipulated,	but	for	his	victory	to	be

complete,	 rebels	 like	 the	 Nishadas	 and	 Nagas,	 who	 were	 fighting	 against	 the
varna	 system,	 had	 to	 be	 eliminated.	 For	 that,	 Parashurama	 required	 divine
intervention.	As	King	Uthayan	sat	massaging	his	tired	feet,	Parashurama	closed
his	eyes	 in	meditation	and	prayed	for	the	victory	of	dharma	 over	 evil	 forces
like	 the	 Nishadas,	 who,	 as	 the	 news	 which	 had	 reached	 him	 said,	 had	 dared
attack	the	holy	city	of	Dwaraka.
***
And	 far	 away,	 in	 the	 northern	 seas	 near	 Dwaraka,	 the	 Gods	 were	 doing
everything	in	their	power	to	sink	a	rickety	fishing	boat.	Precariously	perched
in	the	swaying	boat	was	the	Nishada	who	had	dared	to	attack	Dwaraka.	A	huge
wave	 crashed	over	Ekalavya	and	he	 gasped	for	breath.	 He	did	not	know	how
many	hours	he	had	been	floating	along,	battered	by	wave	upon	wave.	The	sea
was	a	dark	beast	that	roared	and	hissed	around	him.	He	grimaced	as	pain	shot
through	 him.	 Every	 time	 the	 sea	 licked	 his	 wounds	 with	 its	 salty	 tongue,	 his
entire	body	throbbed	in	pain.	‘I	should	have	been	dead	long	ago,’	he	thought	as
another	 wave	 rocked	 his	 puny	 boat,	 almost	 toppling	 it.	 Fortunately,	 the	 frail
craft	steadied	and	he	wiped	the	salt	water	from	his	red-rimmed	eyes.	The	skies
cracked	open	with	lightning	and	the	sea	roared	back.
They	had	almost	won	the	war,	notwithstanding	the	valour	of	the	Yadava	leader.
All	the	tales	of	Balarama	being	frail	and	a	pushover	were	gross	untruths;	the
wounds	 on	 his	 body	 were	 proof	 enough	 of	 that.	 With	 Krishna	 away,	 he	 had
thought	 it	 would	 be	 an	 easy	 matter	 to	 take	 Dwaraka.	 Shalva	 and	 Dhantavakra
had	 paid	 the	 price	 with	 their	 heads.	 ‘But	 I	 could	 have	 still	 pulled	 it	 off,’
Ekalavya	 thought	 wistfully.	 Balarama	 had	 taken	 the	 ruse	 of	 his	 truce	 offer	 at
face	value.	Ekalavya	had	planned	to	slay	Balarama	and	kept	his	dagger	ready.
Then	 he	 would	 have	 taken	 over	 Dwaraka;	 the	 Naga	 revolution	 would	 have
become	reality,	overthrowing	both	Hastinapura	and	the	Confederate	eventually.
But	Krishna	had	arrived	and	foiled	the	plan.	Who	would	have	thought	he	would
sneak	up	from	behind	and	cut	down	Shalva	and	Dhantavakra	like	a	thief	in	the
night?	And	why	had	Takshaka	failed	to	finish	Krishna	in	the	ambush	they	had
planned?
‘Oh	Shiva!’	Ekalavya	gasped	in	horror	as	a	wave,	more	than	twenty	feet	high,
raised	 the	 boat	 like	 a	 straw.	 It	 rode	 the	 crest	 for	 a	 few	 moments	 and	 then
plunged	into	the	trough.	Another	wave	pressed	it	down	as	the	rain	fell	in	sheets.

It	 was	 cold,	 bitterly	 cold.	 Ekalavya	 found	 himself	 struggling	 under	 tons	 of
water.	 Which	 way	 to	 swim;	 which	 was	 up	 and	 which	 down?	 He	 felt	 his	 lungs
would	burst.	‘Do	not	drink	the	water,	hold	on,	hold	on,’	he	told	himself	as	the
sea	pulled	him	down	into	its	watery	embrace.	He	struggled	up,	coughing	and
choking,	 salt	 water	 burning	 his	 nostrils	 as	 another	 wave	 pinned	 him	 down.
When	he	came	up	again,	he	took	a	deep	breath	before	the	next	wave	hit.	Where
had	the	boat	gone?
Ekalavya	 had	 not	 given	 up	 when	 life	 cheated	 him	 at	 birth	 or	 when	 his	 Guru
tried	to	end	his	dreams.	He	would	not	give	up	now.	The	Nishada	battled	on.	‘I
cannot	 die	 now,	 I	 refuse	 to	 die	 now!	 It	 needs	 greater	 forces	 than	 this	 to	 stop
me,’	 Ekalavya	 screamed.	 The	 sea	 roared	 in	 laughter,	 foaming	 and	 frothing,
pounding	and	dragging,	but	the	Nishada	held	on	to	life.	For	another	hour,	the
son	of	the	forest	and	the	sea	played	a	deadly	game,	testing	the	Nishada’s	will	to
survive.	 Finally,	 the	 sea	 gave	 up	 with	 a	 hiss,	 the	 sky	 stopped	 pelting	 rain,
leaving	 a	 few	 streaks	 of	 lightning	 to	 die	 flashy	 deaths	 behind	 the	 breaking
clouds.
Ekalavya	floated	on	his	back	for	a	while.	Where	had	his	boat	gone?	He	knew
he	 could	 not	 float	 like	 this	 forever,	 but	 he	 did	 not	 have	 the	 courage	 to	 look
around.	A	lone	star	appeared	in	the	sky,	vanished	behind	a	dark	cloud,	and	then
returned.	‘You	and	I	are	alone	in	this	black	world,’	Ekalavya	thought	as	the	star
twinkled	above	him.	Determination	seeped	back	into	his	battered	body	and	he
turned,	 scanning	 the	 horizon	 for	 his	 boat.	 There	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 it	 anywhere.
When	 he	 had	 almost	 given	 up,	 brilliant	 lightning	 lit	 up	 the	 sky	 and	 he	 saw
something	far	away.	Was	it	the	boat?	If	it	turned	out	to	be	something	else,	the
sea	would	win.	He	began	to	swim	towards	the	smudge	on	the	horizon,	ignoring
the	pain	in	his	limbs.
It	was	his	boat.	It	took	him	the	better	part	of	an	hour	to	reach	it	and	climb	in.	He
collapsed	into	it,	unmindful	of	the	water	bobbing	inside.	He	did	not	know	how
he	had	survived	thus	far,	nor	did	he	know	whether	he	would	survive	hereafter.
It	had	been	perilous	to	jump	from	the	ramparts	of	the	fort.	Why	had	Balarama
not	shot	him	down	when	he	had	the	chance,	Ekalavya	wondered.	For	a	fraction
of	 a	 second,	 his	 gaze	 had	 locked	 with	 that	 of	 Balarama.	 Ekalavya	 had	 stood
poised	to	jump.	Balarama	had	raised	his	bow,	aiming	at	him.	Then	the	Yadava
leader	had	looked	away	and	his	bow	had	dropped	to	the	floor	of	his	chariot.	At
the	 time	 Ekalavya	 had	 felt	 only	 relief	 as	 he	 jumped	 into	 the	 raging	 sea,

preferring	to	take	his	chance	with	the	elements	rather	than	with	men.	Later,	he
realised	 bitterly	 that	 he	 owed	 his	 life	 to	 the	 very	 man	 he	 had	 planned	 to
assassinate.	 Having	 jumped	 into	 the	 crashing	 sea,	 Ekalavya	 had	 hidden	 in	 a
half-submerged	cave	as	the	Yadava	soldiers	searched	 for	him.	Late	that	night
he	 had	 pushed	 a	 small	 fishing	 boat	 into	 the	 water	 and	 paddled	 away	 without
direction.
Now,	after	his	tortuous	battle	with	the	sea,	as	he	lay	limp	in	the	rickety	boat,	the
Nishada	thanked	the	Gods	for	saving	his	life.	But	gradually,	like	the	first	mists
of	 winter	 creeping	 over	 the	 rushes,	 bitterness	 shrouded	 his	 mind.	 His
indebtedness	 to	 Balarama	 sat	 like	 a	 stone	 in	 his	 heart.	 Ekalavya	 stood	 up,
rocking	the	boat.	He	had	to	find	a	way	to	reach	land	and	resume	battle.	Where
had	 the	 paddle	 gone?	 He	 searched	 desperately,	 knowing	 that	 the	 sea	 had
snatched	it	away.	The	boat	drifted	on.	Helpless,	he	felt	powerless	to	control	his
life	 and	 destiny.	 He	 tried	 to	 stay	 awake,	 recalling	 the	 anger	 he	 felt	 towards
Krishna,	the	Pandavas,	and	all	those	self-righteous	men	who	treated	his	people
like	 dirt;	 but	 nothing	 could	 stop	 the	 cold	 feel	 of	 death	 creeping	 up	 from	 the
dirty	water	at	his	feet.	The	boat	drifted	where	it	pleased.	By	the	next	day,	sleep
had	overcome	the	Nishada.
When	he	woke,	his	mouth	was	gagged	and	he	was	bound	in	chains.
*****

15			SON	OF	A	RAKSHASI
	
“I	DO	NOT	UNDERSTAND,	DHARMAPUTRA.	Why	do	you	refuse	to	fight?”

Yudhishtra	 heard	 the	 impatience	 in	 Dhaumya’s	 voice.	 He	 could	 almost	 feel
Draupadi’s	 mocking	 smile	 behind	 him.	 Why	 did	 she	 always	 judge	 him	 so
harshly?	Why	did	this	Brahmin	not	leave	him	alone?
“I	 am	 a	 fool.	 I	 have	 gambled	 away	 everything.	 Perhaps	 I	 deserved	 it.	 Let
Duryodhana	rule.	He	deserves	the	crown.	What	are	we	after	all?”
“Arjuna,	 speak	 to	 your	 brother.”	 Dhaumya’s	 face	 turned	 red	 with	 anger.	 A
chattering	squirrel	ran	among	the	trees,	as	if	mocking	them.
“I	have	nothing	to	say,”	Arjuna	said	and	continued	to	polish	his	bow.
“It	 is	 such	 a	 long	 period	 of	 exile	 and	 you	 can	 argue	 there	 are	 special
circumstances.	 Yudhishtra,	 your	 mother	 is	 suffering.	 She	 now	 lives	 in	 a
Shudra’s	house.”
“That	is	her	fate.	This	is	mine,”	Yudhishtra	said	quietly.	He	knew	what	would
come	next.
Draupadi	gave	a	mocking	laugh.	“Fate!	Fate	indeed!”
“Draupadi,	is	it	necessary	for	you	to	torture	me	like	this	every	moment?	Yes,	I
made	a	mistake...”
“I	was	stripped	in	public	by	that	evil	Duryodhana.”
“Draupadi,	enough!”
“Enough?	 You	 did	 not	 even	 raise	 a	 little	 finger,	 my	 brave	 and	 truthful

husband.”
“It	was	not	dharma.	I	had	already	lost,	you	were	Duryodhana’s	slave.	I	had	no
voice.”
“It	 is	 better	 we	 stop	 talking	 of	 this,	 brother,”	 Arjuna	 interjected	 before
Draupadi	could	retort.
“So,	 you	 will	 not	 fight?	 Is	 that	 your	 final	 decision?”	 Dhaumya	 asked	 with
barely	concealed	anger.
Yudhishtra	 looked	 around.	 His	 brothers	 were	 looking	 at	 him	 curiously.	 He
could	order	them	to	fight	but	he	was	not	sure	how	much	support	he	would	get.
There	was	no	denying	he	wished	to	rule,	but	something	kept	nagging	at	him.
The	look	of	that	beggar	when	he	had	picked	up	a	handful	of	dust	troubled	him.
Was	 a	 handful	 of	 earth	 worth	 fighting	 a	 war	 over?	 Was	 the	 throne	 worth	 it?
Until	 that	 fateful	 game	 of	 dice,	 his	 political	 moves	 had	 been	 dictated	 by	 his
Guru	 and	 his	 mother;	 it	 had	 been	 a	 game.	 But	 power	 was	 a	 great	 addiction.
Now,	 having	 spent	 barely	 a	 few	 months	 on	 the	 road,	 he	 was	 seeing	 life	 in	 a
completely	 different	 light.	 Nothing	 made	 sense.	 All	 that	 grand	 talk	 about
dharma,	all	the	speculation	about	soul,	karma,	hell,	heaven,	and	rebirth	–	it	all
sounded	hollow.
Even	 glorious	 Indraprastha,	 which	 he	 had	 surrendered	 to	 Duryodhana	 in	 the
game	 of	 dice,	 had	 lost	 its	 appeal.	 He	 had	 met	 a	 few	 Naga	 women	 who	 had
toiled	 to	 build	 the	 palace	 and	 then	 been	 banished	 from	 the	 city.	 Yet	 they	 had
come	to	his	aid	when	he	and	his	brothers	entered	the	forest,	bringing	fruit	for
the	Pandavas	to	eat,	always	standing	at	a	respectful	distance.	He	had	given	them
no	 space	 in	 his	 city,	 yet	 they	 shared	 what	 they	 had	 with	 him.	 It	 was	 all	 very
confusing.
‘War!	Whom	should	I	fight	against?’	he	wondered.	It	had	always	been	Arjuna
who	had	the	doubts,	who	questioned	everything.	He	had	always	been	so	sure	of
his	 own	 divine	 right	 to	 rule,	 what	 dharma	 was.	 Now	 the	 roles	 had	 been
reversed.	His	brothers	thirsted	for	revenge	against	Duryodhana.	They	felt	their
honour	could	only	be	restored	by	killing	Duryodhana	and	his	friends,	who	had
insulted	their	wife	and	made	them	beggars.	As	Guru	Dhaumya	said,	he	should
lead	the	fighting,	yet...

“I	will	not	go	back	on	my	word.	We	will	suffer	the	exile.	After	the	stipulated
period,	if	we	still	feel	the	same	way,	we	will	fight.	Until	then,	let	the	son	of	the
King	rule,”	Yudhishtra	said,	gazing	into	the	distance.
He	heard	a	crash	behind	him	and	turned	back.	Bhima	was	hitting	a	tree	with	his
huge	 mace,	 his	 face	 grim,	 his	 muscles	 taut.	 Arjuna	 sat	 beside	 Draupadi,
consoling	her.	It	distressed	him	to	see	their	strong-minded	wife	weeping.	It	was
more	 painful	 than	 her	 spirited	 rebellion	 and	 mocking	 words.	 The	 twins	 had
wandered	away	and	Dhaumya	followed	them.	Yudhishtra	knew	the	Guru	would
try	to	persuade	him	again	later.	The	Guru	would	say	all	the	right	things,	such
as	taking	revenge	against	Duryodhana	for	disrobing	Draupadi.	He	would	try	to
incite	 their	 anger.	 Why	 did	 he	 not	 feel	 any	 rage?	 As	 a	 man	 wronged,	 anger
should	 have	 festered	 within	 him	 like	 a	 sore;	 every	 living	 moment	 he	 should
have	felt	burning	pain,	yet	all	he	felt	was	numbness.	‘Is	it	because	there	is	very
little	 Kshatriya	 blood	 in	 me?’	 he	 wondered.	 Who	 had	 been	 his	 father?	 How
much	credence	could	be	given	to	his	mother ’s	stories	about	his	divine	birth	as
a	 gift	 from	 the	 God	 of	 Death?	 Yama?	 Did	 such	 a	 God	 even	 exist?	 Yama	 was
nothing	 but	 time,	 kala,	 dark	 time.	 ‘Am	 I	 then	 the	 son	 of	 Time?’	 Yudhishtra
wanted	to	laugh.	Perhaps	this	exile	was	a	catharsis,	a	journey	of	self-discovery
in	 search	 of	 the	 real	 meaning	 of	 dharma.	 Not	 the	 dharma	 spoken	 of	 by
Dhaumya	or	even	the	silver-tongued	Krishna.
Yudhishtra’s	 thoughts	 were	 interrupted	 by	 Bhima.	 His	 huge	 brother	 stood
reverently	 before	 him.	 “Brother,	 I	 wish	 to	 see	 my	 son.	 I	 saw	 him	 and	 his
mother	 from	 a	 distance	 today.	 The	 forest	 dwellers	 say	 Hidumbi	 and	 my	 little
one	live	in	this	forest.”
Yudhishtra	stared	at	Bhima	without	comprehending	what	he	was	saying.	Son?
Which	son?	Then	he	remembered	–	the	son	of	that	untouchable	Rakshasi,	the
Asura	woman,	Hidumbi.	He	did	not	know	what	to	say.
“Yudhishtra,	 that	 son	 was	 a	 youthful	 mistake	 by	 your	 brother.	 I	 have	 been
trying	to	make	Bhima	see	reason,	but	nothing	seems	to	change	his	mind.	It	is
accepted	that	Kshatriyas	seek	honey	in	different	flowers,	like	a	bee,	but	the	fruit
belongs	to	the	plant,	not	the	bee.”	Dhaumya	rushed	to	speak,	afraid	Yudhishtra
would	weaken	and	forget	his	dharma.
“Brother,	I	saw	my	son	today.	Just	once,	I	want	to	hold	his	hand.	He	refuses	to

leave	my	mind.”	Bhima	pleaded.
Yudhishtra	 looked	 at	 Dhaumya.	 A	 few	 days	 before,	 he	 would	 have
categorically	 refused	 such	 a	 request.	 How	 could	 his	 brother	 associate	 with
untouchables?	 Kshatriya	 boys	 were	 permitted	 such	 exploits,	 though	 he	 had
never	 indulged	 in	 them.	 However,	 looking	 into	 Bhima’s	 eyes,	 he	 could	 not
bring	himself	to	deny	his	brother.	He	looked	at	Dhaumya	for	a	way	out.
“Bhima,	 they	 are	 untouchables,	 Rakshasas,”	 Dhaumya	 said,	 shaking	 his	 head
vigorously.
“Hidumbi	is	my	wife	and	Khatotkacha	is	my	son,”	Bhima	stated	flatly,	almost
choking	in	his	effort	to	speak.
Yudhishtra	was	surprised	by	Bhima’s	sudden	display	of	emotion.	He	had	rarely
seen	his	brother	with	anything	but	a	scowl	on	his	face	and	had	often	wondered
whether	he	felt	any	emotion	other	than	anger.	Life	in	the	forest	was	changing
them	 all.	 He	 was	 about	 to	 give	 his	 permission	 when	 Yudhishtra	 caught
Dhaumya’s	eye.	He	had	angered	his	Guru	enough	for	one	day.
“Bhima,	my	brother,	it	is	not	good	to	have	attachment	towards	anything	in	life.
Attachment	 leads	 to	 grief.	 Bhima,	 stop!”	 Yudhishtra	 watched	 Bhima	 walking
away	without	waiting	to	hear	more.	Bhima	picked	up	his	mace	again	and	began
raining	violent	blows	on	a	tree.	He	saw	Draupadi	move	towards	Bhima	and	felt
a	 pang	 of	 jealousy.	 He	 was	 aware	 of	 Dhaumya’s	 eyes	 watching	 him	 and	 he
hoped	his	emotions	were	 not	reflected	on	his	face.	He	could	hear	Draupadi’s
voice	 clearly,	 telling	 Bhima	 more	 loudly	 than	 necessary,	 to	 imagine	 that	 the
tree	 was	 Duryodhana.	 The	 tree	 shook	 in	 rhythm	 to	 the	 thudding	 of	 Bhima’s
mace,	 shedding	 leaves	 and	 splintering	 inch	 by	 inch	 in	 groaning	 protest.	 The
violence	in	the	air	was	frightening	and	Yudhishtra	shuddered	when	he	heard	his
Guru	laughing.
Dhaumya	turned	to	Yudhishtra	and	said,	“Prince,	do	not	let	the	anger	die.	That
evil	son	of	the	King	has	to	be	killed	one	day.	He	and	his	friends	are	destroying
our	dharma.”
“Let	my	brother	Bhima	take	care	of	Duryodhana,”	Arjuna	said	as	he	whisked
his	 bow	 from	 his	 shoulder	 and	 in	 one	 fluid	 movement,	 shot	 an	 arrow	 at	 a

distant	 tree.	 Another	 arrow	 followed,	 piercing	 the	 first	 with	 unnerving
accuracy.	 A	 third	 followed	 and	 split	 the	 second.	 Then	 Arjuna	 turned	 to	 his
brother.	“It	is	not	Duryodhana’s	head	I	yearn	for.	When	all	is	said	and	done,	he
is	of	our	blood,	our	cousin.	What	I	cannot	stand	is	the	arrogance	of	that	low
caste	Suta.	One	day,	my	arrow	will	pierce	Karna’s	heart.”
Guru	Dhaumya	retired	to	his	hut	with	a	smile.	He	was	leaving	the	next	morning
but	had	promised	to	return	with	Krishna.	Yudhishtra	was	sure	that	even	Krishna
could	not	persuade	him	to	break	his	resolve	to	not	fight	till	their	term	of	exile
was	finished.	The	sun	was	sinking	behind	the	trees	and	the	forest	was	alive	with
the	chatter	of	monkeys	and	birds.
As	 Yudhishtra	 stood	 watching	 him	 aim	 arrow	 after	 arrow	 in	 anger,	 an
uncomfortable	thought	entered	his	mind.	Perhaps	it	was	the	angle	of	the	setting
sun	or	perhaps	it	was	just	a	delusion	induced	by	hunger.
Arjuna	 looked	 at	 Yudhishtra	 and	 smiled.	 “Why	 are	 you	 staring	 like	 that,
brother?”	 Arjuna	 shot	 another	 arrow.	 There	 was	 that	 thought	 again!	 Arjuna
turned	 and	 chuckled.	 “Brother,	 your	 expression	 resembles	 our	 evil	 cousin,
Duryodhana.”
Yudhishtra	looked	at	Arjuna	in	silence	and	then	sauntered	back	to	his	hut.	It	was
time	 for	 his	 evening	 ablutions.	 He	 had	 been	 shocked	 by	 Arjuna’s	 words.
Expressions	 mirrored	 the	 thoughts	 of	 the	 mind.	 He	 had	 often	 laughed	 at	 the
confused	face	Duryodhana	sometimes	had.	Then	he	had	been	sure	about	right
and	wrong	and	had	mocked	his	cousin	for	not	knowing	what	dharma	was.	Now
he	 was	 not	 sure	 who	 was	 right	 and	 who	 was	 wrong.	 He	 should	 have	 felt	 the
same	anger	Arjuna	or	Bhima	felt	for	the	wrongs	done	to	them.	That	he	did	not,
surprised	and	confused	him.	He	needed	to	ponder	over	it.
As	Yudhishtra	washed	his	feet	before	entering	his	hut,	he	looked	back	at	Arjuna
once	 more.	 In	 a	 flash,	 the	 same	 thought	 that	 had	 flashed	 through	 his	 mind
earlier,	 returned	 with	 blinding	 force.	 His	 brother	 resembled	 that	 low-caste
impostor,	Karna!	How	could	a	Prince	of	the	Kuru	dynasty	resemble	a	Suta?	In
the	final	reckoning,	was	there	no	difference	between	him	and	Duryodhana,	or
Arjuna	and	Karna?	Night	had	descended	from	the	heavens	and	the	forest	was
silent	except	for	the	sound	of	crickets.	Yudhishtra	placed	a	reed	mat	on	the	mud
veranda	 and	 sat	 down	 to	 meditate.	 But	 his	 mind	 refused	 to	 be	 tamed.	 Right,

wrong,	dharma,	adharma,	duty,	devotion,	evil,	good,	princes,	beggars,	Nagas,
Krishna,	everything	jumbled	together	in	a	confused	melee.
A	few	feet	away,	Draupadi	was	urging	Bhima	to	hit	the	tree	harder.	He	should
have	allowed	Bhima	to	see	the	Rakshasi	woman	and	her	son.	Perhaps	the	next
time	he	asked,	he	would	let	his	brother	go	to	see	Khatotkacha.	But	Yudhishtra
knew	 Bhima	 would	 never	 ask	 again.	 With	 a	 crash,	 the	 huge	 tree	 fell,
frightening	 the	 night	 birds.	 Yudhishtra	 looked	 up	 from	 his	 disturbed
meditations.	Draupadi’s	laughter	filled	the	silence	of	the	night	and	Yudhishtra
felt	a	shiver	of	fear.	‘Duryodhana,	may	this	exile	never	end.	Then,	perhaps,	we
may	both	escape	facing	the	inevitable,’	Yudhishtra	murmured	softly.	When	he
looked	up,	Guru	Dhaumya	was	standing	beside	him,	a	deep	frown	on	his	face,
his	 arms	 crossed	 over	 his	 chest.	 With	 head	 bent	 like	 a	 child	 caught	 stealing,
Yudhishtra	went	into	his	hut	without	a	word	and	closed	the	door.
But	 late	 into	 the	 night,	 Yudhishtra	 kept	 wondering	 about	 the	 strange
resemblance	 between	 the	 Suta	 and	 his	 brother,	 Arjuna.	 When	 he	 remembered
Karna,	 his	 jeering	 laugh	 in	 the	 Sabha	 echoed	 in	 his	 mind.	 The	 Suta	 was
enjoying	 the	 royal	 life	 of	 Hastinapura	 with	 his	 friends	 while	 he,	 the	 son	 of
dharma,	 the	 man	 who	 had	 followed	 every	 religious	 vow,	 performed	 every
ritual	without	fail,	respected	Brahmins	and	cows,	done	all	that	was	proper,	and
never	 uttered	 a	 lie,	 languished	 in	 the	 forest	 wearing	 a	 single	 cloth.	 Life	 had
been	unfair	to	him	by	showering	blessings	on	the	undeserving,	like	Karna.	But
he	 would	 not	 be	 bitter;	 he	 would	 accept	 his	 destiny.	 He	 would	 grow	 beyond
hatred	and	find	meaning	in	such	ironies,	the	eldest	Pandava	vowed	to	himself.
But,	like	an	aftertaste	of	unpalatable	medicine,	Karna’s	laughter	when	Draupadi
had	stood	shamed,	refused	to	leave	him.	How	lucky	men	like	Karna	were!	He
struggled	 to	 concentrate	 his	 mind	 on	 meditation,	 but	 the	 Suta’s	 laughter
continued	to	ring	in	his	ears.
***
Which	 of	 those	 men	 was	 his	 father?	 From	 a	 distance	 Khatotkacha	 thought	 he
recognised	him.	His	mother	had	pointed	out	a	giant	of	a	man	who	stood	at	least
a	 foot	 taller	 than	 the	 other	 Pandavas.	 As	 a	 child,	 he	 had	 fantasised	 about	 this
moment,	when	his	famous	father	would	visit	him	in	their	tribal	village,	shower
him	with	presents	and	embrace	him.	The	adults	treated	him	with	respect,	saying
he	was	lucky	to	be	the	son	of	the	famed	Pandava,	Bhima.	But	among	the	boys

of	his	own	age,	he	was	the	subject	of	ridicule.	His	small	frame	did	not	help	and
when	 one	 of	 the	 older	 boys	 had	 called	 him	 a	 bastard,	 he	 had	 fought	 him	 and
lost.	He	had	rushed	to	his	mother	with	a	bleeding	nose	and	a	black	eye.	Holding
back	his	tears	he	had	asked	her	what	‘bastard’	meant.	His	mother	had	cried	for
a	long	time	that	day	but	she	had	not	told	him	what	the	word	meant.
Later,	 when	 the	 last	 lamp	 in	 the	 village	 had	 gone	 out,	 and	 they	 were	 lying
together	in	the	courtyard,	his	mother	had	told	him	the	story	of	his	father	and
his	 uncle	 Hidumba,	 whom	 his	 father	 had	 slain.	 She	 told	 him	 of	 Bhima’s
exploits	 and	 heroism,	 how	 he	 always	 defeated	 his	 evil	 cousin,	 Duryodhana.
Little	 Khatotkacha’s	 heart	 filled	 with	 pride.	 If	 bastard	 meant	 being	 the	 son	 of
such	a	great	man,	he	could	handle	the	taunts	of	his	friends.	He	asked	innocently
when	 his	 father	 would	 come	 to	 see	 them	 and	 waited	 a	 long	 time	 for	 a	 reply,
staring	at	the	distant	stars	that	blinked	at	him	from	afar.	There	was	no	answer
that	night,	nor	any	night	that	followed.	But	in	his	dreams,	his	father	took	him
upon	his	lap	and	played	with	him.	That	was	enough.
“Shhh,	 Khatotkacha,	 you	 promised	 you	 would	 not	 make	 a	 sound,”	 Hidumbi
said,	tightening	her	grip	on	his	little	wrist.
“But	he	is	my	father.	You	said	he	would	come	to	see	me	with	lots	of	presents...”
The	 boy	 pressed	 his	 lips	 together,	 excited	 and	 tense.	 His	 mother	 had	 warned
him	not	to	make	a	sound.	They	were	perched	on	a	little	hillock	and	had	been
waiting	since	dawn.	At	last,	he	could	see	five	men	and	a	woman	walking	along
the	 forest	 path.	 He	 tried	 to	 wriggle	 free	 from	 his	 mother ’s	 grip	 but	 she	 held
him	firmly.	When	the	strangers	were	about	to	vanish	from	view,	he	managed	to
escape	and	run	towards	them.
Hidumbi	choked	on	a	sob	and	called	out,	“Khatotkacha,	wait!”
The	 boy	 crashed	 through	 the	 thick	 undergrowth,	 startling	 the	 tall	 man	 in	 the
lead.	 Khatotkacha	 suddenly	 wished	 he	 was	 back	 with	 his	 mother,	 but	 his	 legs
refused	to	move.	His	heart	thudded	against	his	ribs	and	his	throat	felt	dry.	One
of	the	men	had	taken	out	his	sword.
“Bhima,	this	urchin	looks	familiar,”	the	first	man	said	to	the	giant	behind	him.
Khatotkacha’s	shoulders	relaxed.	He	was	sure	his	father	would	come	forward

and	lift	him	up.	At	that	moment,	his	mother ’s	work-worn	hands	pressed	against
his	shoulders.	She	was	staring	at	his	father.	Why	did	he	not	even	smile	at	her?
“Father...”	Khatotkacha	muttered.	Bhima	took	a	hesitant	step	forward.
“Rakshasas!	Do	not	pollute	yourself,	Bhima,”	Yudhishtra	urged.
Bhima	froze.	Hidumbi’s	grip	tightened	on	Khatotkacha’s	shoulder.	He	saw	the
pain	in	his	father ’s	eyes	as	the	woman	with	them	said	with	a	jeer,	“Don’t	touch
them?	How	did	Bhima	father	this	boy?	Another	divine	birth?”
Yudhishtra	 turned	 to	 Draupadi.	 “Do	 not	 concern	 yourself	 with	 them.	 The
marriage	was	due	to	my	mother ’s	misguided	pity.	Bhima	killed	Hidumba,	this
woman’s	brother,	so	our	mother	made	Bhima	marry	this	Rakshasi.	Today	we
are	paying	for	that	sin.”
Bhima	stood	with	his	gaze	fixed	on	his	giant	toes.
Pointing	 at	 Khatotkacha,	 Draupadi	 asked,	 “Sin?	 This	 small	 boy	 is	 a	 sin	 to
you?”	Draupadi’s	mirthless	laugh	echoed	the	bitterness	in	Hidumbi’s	heart.
“Draupadi,	when	woman	mocks,	misfortune	follows,”	Yudhishtra	said	sternly.
Draupadi	laughed	again,	startling	the	birds	in	the	trees.	“Of	course,	of	course,
it	was	my	laughter	that	ruined	us,	Yudhishtra,	not	your	gambling.	We	all	know
that.”
Khatotkacha	 saw	 the	 trace	 of	 a	 smile	 on	 the	 lips	 of	 the	 man	 standing	 near
Bhima,	 but	 then	 Yudhishtra	 said	 to	 him,	 “Arjuna,	 let	 us	 not	 waste	 time	 in
frivolous	chatter.	Ask	this	Rakshasi	and	her	son	to	move	out	of	our	path	so	that
we	can	proceed.”
Without	a	word	Hidumbi	moved	to	one	side,	dragging	Khatotkacha	with	her.	A
teardrop	fell	on	his	head	and	he	looked	up.	His	mother	was	wiping	her	eyes.
Was	she	crying	because	he	had	not	behaved	well?	Should	he	have	touched	his
father ’s	feet	and	asked	for	his	blessing?
“Father!”	Khatotkacha	called	out.

Bhima	 stopped.	 His	 companions	 turned	 to	 look.	 Khatotkacha	 gulped	 in
embarrassment.	His	father	was	staring	at	him.	 He	tried	 to	keep	his	chin	from
trembling.	“Father,	I	heard	that	Prince	Duryodhana	cheated	you	of	your	palace.
When	you	fight	that	evil	man,	call	me,	I	will	come	to	help	you.”
“Now	that	was	the	only	insult	left	–	street	urchins	and	untouchables	offering	to
help	the	Pandavas,”	Arjuna	said.	The	others	laughed	at	the	irony.	Even	Bhima
laughed.
That	 hurt	 Khatotkacha	 the	 most.	 His	 mother	 dragged	 him	 away.	 He	 was	 so
small,	 with	 such	 puny	 little	 hands	 and	 dark	 skin.	 Which	 father	 would	 not	 be
ashamed	 of	 such	 a	 son?	 Perhaps	 a	 bastard	 was	 someone	 whose	 father	 was
ashamed	 to	 admit	 you	 were	 his	 son.	 Khatotkacha	 silently	 vowed	 to	 become	 a
great	warrior	one	day.	He	would	never	let	down	his	tall,	handsome	father.	He
wanted	to	scream	his	determination	to	Bhima’s	retreating	form.	He	burrowed
his	heels	into	the	earth	to	make	his	mother	stop	and	turned	to	look	at	his	father
one	last	time.	The	sun	leaked	through	the	jungle	canopy	and	leaves	rustled	in
the	breeze.	His	father	and	uncles	had	vanished,	but	their	laughter	lingered	in	the
air.
*****

16			LESSER	MEN
	
VIDHURA	HAD	BEEN	STANDING	without	saying	a	word.	He	shifted	his	weight	from

one	 leg	 to	 the	 other,	 desperately	 wishing	 he	 could	 sit	 down.	 Today	 he	 was
feeling	 his	 years.	 Bhishma	 had	 not	 spoken	 since	 evening.	 He	 kept	 staring
through	 the	 window,	 his	 hands	 clasped	 behind	 him,	 deep	 in	 thought.	 Outside,
the	 city	 of	 Hastinapura	 was	 decorated	 with	 oil	 lamps	 and	 colourful	 festoons.
The	 mood	 inside	 the	 chamber	 of	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 was	 more	 suited	 to	 a
funeral	than	a	festival.	Outside,	drums	beat	in	a	frenzied	rhythm.	The	clopping
of	horseshoes,	the	clanging	of	bells	and	the	waxing	and	waning	of	thousands
of	 cheering	 voices	 could	 be	 heard,	 sometimes	 clearly,	 sometimes	 from	 a
distance.	 A	 reluctant	 breeze	 entered,	 making	 the	 lone	 torch	 in	 the	 chamber
flicker,	 and	 played	 gently	 with	 the	 long	 flowing	 beard	 of	 the	 Grand	 Regent.
The	beard	was	now	completely	white.	They	were	both	ageing.	Vidhura	sighed
at	the	thought.
“How	did	the	Suta	achieve	it,	Vidhura?”	Bhishma	finally	asked.
Vidhura	 wished	 he	 had	 not	 heard	 the	 hint	 of	 jealousy.	 He	 had	 no	 answer.	 He
focused	his	eyes	on	the	pool	of	darkness	in	the	corner	of	the	room.	He	could
not	 look	 at	 the	 pain	 in	 Bhishma’s	 eyes.	 Applause	 sounded	 outside	 and	 the
beating	 of	 drums	 grew	 louder.	 The	 Suta’s	 victory	 procession	 had	 entered	 the
fort.	 Karna,	 the	 son	 of	 a	 charioteer,	 had	 achieved	 what	 generations	 of	 Kuru
princes	could	not.	He	had	defeated	the	powerful	Southern	Confederate	and	was
returning	 with	 immeasurable	 wealth	 from	 the	 South.	 The	 cheers	 of
‘Dhanaveera’,	‘Dharmaveera’,	and	‘Digvijayi	Karna’,	echoed	around	the	fort,
making	the	silence	in	the	chamber	unbearable	to	the	two	men.
“I	never	imagined	the	South	could	be	conquered,	and	that	too,	by	a	mere	Suta.”
Bhishma	gripped	the	bars	of	the	window.	“I	think	there	is	more	here	than	the
eye	 can	 see.	 Do	 you	 think	 Parashurama	 would	 have	 bestowed	 his	 bhargava
astra	 on	 this	 Suta	 without	 thinking?	 The	 Suta	 must	 have	 used	 deceit.	 I	 cannot

believe	he	would	otherwise	have	subdued	the	South	so	easily.	The	most	I	could
gain	was	a	worthless	truce.”
Vidhura	did	not	reply.	Bhishma	began	pacing	up	and	down.	Vidhura	focussed
on	the	Regent’s	shadow,	which	grew	into	a	giant	one	moment	and	then	turned
into	a	dwarf	the	next,	when	he	turned.
“There	 could	 be	 a	 trap,	 Vidhura.	 The	 fool	 Suyodhana	 thinks	 the	 South	 is	 an
ally.	 They	 are	 the	 people	 who	 never	 forget	 a	 slight.	 And	 a	 mere	 Suta	 has
conquered	them.	All	the	loot	the	Suta	has	brought	with	him	is	going	to	be	of	no
use	to	us.	The	South	will	turn	against	us	when	it	would	matter	most,	I	am	sure
of	it.”
Outside,	the	cheering	rose	to	a	crescendo	and	Bhishma	paused	to	listen.	“I	must
warn	Suyodhana.	It	will	be	difficult	for	me	to	face	that	Suta.	I	never	expected	to
see	him	again.	But	I	must	swallow	my	pride,	must	I	not,	Vidhura?	Nobody	will
say	the	son	of	Ganga	did	not	respect	a	great	warrior.	Yes,	that	boy	is	good,	too
good	for	his	own	well-being.	Karna!	What	a	son	you	fathered,	Athiratha.”
Vidhura	 sneaked	 a	 glance	 at	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 and	 saw	 a	 small	 smile	 lift	 his
lips.	He	relaxed.
“How	did	he	win	when	I	could	not?”	Bhishma	asked	again.	“To	face	everyone
after	what	I	said	to	that	Suta	will	be	difficult,	Vidhura,	but	I	must.	I	have	never
run	 from	 a	 battlefield	 and	 I	 will	 not	 run	 from	 embarrassment.”	 Suddenly,
Bhishma	put	his	hand	on	his	Prime	Minister ’s	shoulders	and	said,	“If	I	falter	in
my	 courtesies	 to	 the	 Suta,	 Vidhura,	 stand	 beside	 me	 and	 remind	 me	 of	 my
duty.”
Vidhura	 turned	 away,	 unable	 to	 look	 at	 those	 greying	 eyes.	 His	 heart	 felt	 as
heavy	as	a	stone.	At	that	moment	Vidhura	hated	the	Suta	and	his	victory	more
than	anything	in	life.
Bhishma	went	to	his	chair,	sat	down,	and	gestured	to	Vidhura	to	sit	near	him.
Relieved,	Vidhura	eased	himself	onto	the	chair.	Bhishma	began	going	through
the	pile	of	palm	leaves	on	the	table	but	it	was	evident	his	mind	was	not	on	the
task.	The	victory	procession	had	moved	into	the	palace	and	the	faint	sounds	of
cheering	and	clapping	floated	into	the	Grand	Regent’s	chamber.	Each	time	they

heard	 footsteps	 outside,	 the	 men	 looked	 at	 each	 other	 and	 then	 at	 the	 door,
expectantly.	 After	 what	 seemed	 like	 an	 unendurably	 long	 wait,	 they	 heard	 a
knock.
Bhishma	sat	back	in	his	chair,	the	expression	on	his	rugged	face	was	stern	and
cold.	“It	must	be	Suyodhana	and	his	friends	come	to	tell	us	of	the	victory.”
Vidhura	 walked	 to	 the	 door.	 It	 opened	 to	 admit	 a	 servant,	 who	 bowed	 deeply
and	placed	a	silver	tray	with	a	glass	of	milk	and	a	bowl	of	dried	fruit	and	nuts
on	the	table	and	then	left	without	a	word.	The	two	most	important	men	in	the
empire	looked	at	each	other	silently.
Bhishma	 beckoned	 to	 Vidhura	 and	 they	 began	 poring	 over	 the	 various
administrative	matters	of	State.	Time	dragged	by.	The	party	ended	in	the	palace
but	no	invitation	came	for	the	Grand	Regent.	Finally,	when	the	sky	had	grown
grey	in	the	east,	Bhishma	stood	up	wearily.
Vidhura	did	not	look	up.	He	knew	what	was	coming.	When	the	Royal	Insignia
of	 the	 Kuru	 empire	 was	 gently	 placed	 before	 him,	 the	 Prime	 Minister	 turned
away,	tears	in	his	eyes.	“No	Swami,	no.	Do	not	do	this...”
“Vidhura,	my	time	has	ended.	Prince	Suyodhana	is	being	kind.	Remember	my
words,	Vidhura?	I	said	I	would	hand	over	the	reins	of	empire	to	him	if	the	Suta
came	 back	 alive.	 Well,	 he	 has	 not	 only	 come	 back	 alive,	 but	 victorious.
Hastinapura	no	longer	needs	the	services	of	this	old	man.	The	Prince	has	subtly
reminded	me	of	my	own	insignificance.”
“No,	Swami,	no.”	Vidhura	stood	up	angrily.	“I	will	talk	sense	into	that	young
fool.	 He	 cannot	 treat	 you	 like	 this.	 I	 will	 not	 allow	 anyone	 to	 treat	 you	 like
this.”
“Vidhura,	 no	 man	 is	 indispensable	 –	 neither	 you,	 nor	 me.	 If	 someone	 thinks
otherwise,	he	is	a	fool.	The	world	existed	before	us,	and	will	do	so	after	we	are
gone.	 My	 time	 has	 ended,	 that	 is	 all.	 I	 am	 no	 longer	 young.	 I	 have	 borne	 the
burden	 of	 ruling	 this	 country	 for	 a	 very	 long	 time.	 For	 the	 last	 three
generations,	I	have	nurtured	this	kingdom,	without	in-fighting,	palace	feuds	or
coups.	 Before	 me,	 the	 corridors	 of	 power	 were	 paved	 with	 the	 flesh	 of	 kin
fighting	kin	for	the	throne.	The	flowers	in	the	garden	drank	more	blood	than

water.	For	three	generations,	I	have	preserved	this	land.	Now	the	Princes	have
grown	up.	My	duty	is	done.	The	time	has	come	for	this	old	man	to	rest.”
“Sir,	the	throne	for	which	all	these	fools	are	fighting,	belongs	to	you.	It	is	only
because	of	your	renunciation...”
“I	did	it	voluntarily,	Vidhura.	This	also	I	do	voluntarily.	I	must	keep	my	word.
Let	Suyodhana	rule.	Let	him	learn	how	easy	or	difficult	it	is	to	rule	a	country,	a
people.	Let	me	sit	back	and	watch.	It	is	already	a	new	day.	The	past	was	buried
yesterday.	 The	 sun	 is	 now	 shining	 on	 a	 new	 generation.	 The	 Sun	 God	 has
showered	his	blessings	on	the	Suta.	So	be	it.	Who	am	I	to	question	destiny?”
“Swami,	they	are	young	and	heedless,	they	may	have	forgotten...	”
“Vidhura,	the	past	is	meant	to	be	forgotten.	We	are	the	past.	I	am	not	bitter,	why
are	 you?	 Hand	 over	 the	 Insignia	 to	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 and	 announce	 my
retirement.	 Do	 not	 wake	 him	 now.	 They	 will	 be	 tired	 after	 their	 celebrations.
You,	too,	go	home	and	get	some	sleep.	I	can	now	sleep	with	a	clear	conscience
and	a	free	heart.	Ah!	The	sweetness	of	freedom	is	exhilarating.	I	should	have
done	this	long	ago.”
With	 a	 sinking	 heart,	 Vidhura	 took	 the	 Insignia	 from	 the	 Grand	 Regent’s
outstretched	hand	and	walked	to	the	door.
“Vidhura.”	 The	 call	 was	 soft	 and	 tender	 and	 Vidhura	 felt	 he	 would	 collapse
right	there	and	die.	“Son,	do	not	do	anything	rash.	You	have	a	family	to	feed.
Your	 children	 are	 still	 young.	 Do	 not	 resign	 your	 post.	 The	 younger
generation	needs	your	wise	counsel.”
“Suyodhana	can	search	for	a	new	Prime	Minister	from	today.	If	poverty	awaits
me,	so	be	it,	but	I	will	not	bow	my	head	to	any	man	other	than	you.”
For	the	first	time	in	his	life	Vidhura	defied	the	Grand	Regent	and	walked	out.
He	 did	 not	 know	 how	 he	 was	 going	 to	 feed	 his	 family	 and	 bring	 up	 his
children,	but	he	was	determined	never	to	enter	the	palace	again.
It	was	a	glorious	day	outside.
*****

17			DARK	PRINCE
	
A	 LONG	 TRAIN	 OF	 SERVANTS	 CARRIED	 in	 the	 ransom	 and	 loot	 from	 the	 Southern

Confederate	and	piled	it	in	the	Sabha.	Karna	walked	to	the	centre	of	the	great
hall	and	pulled	out	a	fistful	of	precious	stones.	He	turned	towards	the	group	of
Brahmins	 standing	 huddled	 in	 the	 corner	 with	 sullen	 faces.	 “Revered	 ones,
these	 are	 the	 humble	 offerings	 of	 a	 Suta,”	 he	 said,	 placing	 the	 stones	 on	 the
floor	and	walking	back	a	few	steps	so	as	not	to	pollute	them.	He	stood	humbly,
his	head	bowed.
The	Brahmin	priests	looked	at	each	other.	One	of	them	quickly	moved	forward
to	pick	up	the	stones.	Seeing	that	the	Suta’s	respect	appeared	to	be	genuine,	they
broke	into	animated	conversation.	Finally,	one	of	them	cried	out,	“Dhanaveera
Karna!	Dharmaveera	Karna!”
An	uneasy	silence	followed.	Karna	stood	upright	and	tense.	Then	the	group	of
priests	shouted	the	accolades	in	chorus,	their	voices	reverberating	through	the
palace.	Karna’s	handsome	face	lit	up	like	the	rising	sun.	At	last,	he	was	getting
his	due.	The	people	who	mattered	were	accepting	him	as	a	hero.
“What	is	all	this,	Karna?”	Suyodhana	whispered	in	his	friend’s	ear,	but	Karna
ignored	him.	He	was	terrified	that	his	friend	would	say	something	rash.
Bhanumati	 appeared	 with	 her	 twins,	 saving	 the	 situation.	 Lakshmana	 Kumara
ran	towards	Karna,	followed	by	his	sister.	They	jumped	into	Karna’s	arms	as
Bhanumati	looked	on	with	a	smile.	But	when	her	eyes	met	Karna’s,	she	pressed
her	lips	together	and	tears	filled	her	eyes.	Suyodhana	stood	apart.	Karna	sensed
that	 something	 was	 wrong	 between	 his	 friend	 and	 his	 wife.	 What	 had
happened?
“Where	is	Aswathama?”	Karna	asked.
Suyodhana	 stared	 out	 of	 the	 window.	 Karna’s	 eyes	 searched	 for	 the	 impish

Brahmin	in	the	crowd.	Had	he	not	returned	from	Gandhara?
“He	has	not	come	back,”	Bhanumati	whispered.
“Not	 come	 back!	 And	 you	 are	 sitting	 here	 doing	 nothing?”	 Karna	 turned	 to
Suyodhana	but	his	friend	refused	to	look	at	him.
“Lord	 Bhishma	 has	 a	 vice-like	 grip	 over	 everything.	 He	 and	 Uncle	 Vidhura
would	 not	 hear	 of	 a	 rescue	 mission	 to	 Gandhara.	 Why	 blame	 Suyodhana?”
Sushasana	said,	moving	closer	to	his	brother.
“Suyodhana,	we	must	save	him,”	Karna	said,	his	eyes	glittering	dangerously.
A	soldier	entered	and	announced	the	King	of	Sindh.
“Jayadratha!	We	had	no	prior	intimation	of	your	coming!”	Suyodhana	walked
towards	the	proud	King,	hands	outstretched.
Jayadratha	 looked	 at	 the	 bounty	 piled	 in	 the	 hall,	 the	 group	 of	 Brahmins
standing	with	their	presents	clutched	to	their	chests,	and	laughed	mirthlessly.	A
flush	crept	into	Karna’s	cheeks.
“Congratulations,	my	friend.	You	have	become	Dhanaveera	Digvijayi	Karna,”
Jayadratha	said,	the	sarcasm	barely	concealed.
“With	the	help	of	your	men,	Your	Highness.	It	is	all	thanks	to	the	bravery	of	the
soldiers	you	lent	me,”	Karna	said	with	cold	civility,	bowing	low.	The	soldiers
of	 Sindh	 had	 been	 the	 first	 to	 turn	 tail	 when	 they	 faced	 the	 assault	 of	 the
Confederate	troops.
“I	 have	 a	 gift	 for	 you,	 Suyodhana.	 I	 have	 captured	 the	 leader	 of	 the	 Nagas	 –
Takshaka	himself,”	Jayadratha	announced.
An	awed	hush	fell	in	the	Sabha.
“Bring	him	in!”	Jayadratha	commanded,	his	cold	eyes	never	leaving	the	proud
Suta’s	face.	He	was	not	the	only	man	who	could	perform	wondrous	feats.
As	 the	Sabha	 waited	anxiously,	 a	 group	of	soldiers	 pushed	and	 shoved	a	tall,

dark	man	in	chains	into	the	hall.	His	muscles	rippled	as	he	tried	to	free	himself.
“Behold	 Takshaka!”	 Jayadratha	 turned	 to	 Suyodhana,	 awaiting	 his	 words	 of
appreciation.
The	 Sabha	 reverberated	 with	 applause.	 When	 the	 din	 died	 down,	 Suyodhana
moved	towards	the	captive	man.	His	gaze	rested	on	the	man’s	right	hand.	It	had
four	fingers.	The	captive	looked	him	straight	in	the	eyes,	the	hint	of	a	smile	on
his	lips.
“Ekalavya!	 Welcome	 to	 the	 Sabha	 of	 the	 Dark	 Prince,	 Duryodhana,”	 said
Suyodhana.
*****

18			NISHADA’S	DAUGHTER
	
EKALAVYA	EYED	THE	CROWN	PRINCE	HAUGHTILY.	He	knew	it	was	a	futile	statement

but	 he	 could	 not	 help	 rattling	 the	 chains	 that	 bound	 him.	 ‘They	 are	 amused,
these	privileged,	highborn	rascals;	amused	to	see	me	like	this.	They	make	me
stand	in	their	Sabha	like	a	performing	monkey	in	a	market.’	Rancour	welled	in
his	heart	like	bitter	bile.	‘Where	is	Drona’s	son?	Why	did	the	Suta	laugh?	They
will	no	doubt	purify	the	marble	floors	with	cow	dung	after	sending	me	to	the
gallows.	 They	 should	 have	 killed	 me	 instead	 of	 subjecting	 me	 to	 such
humiliation.’
“Untie	him.”
Ekalavya	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 ears.	 A	 soldier	 struggled	 to	 free	 him	 of	 his
chains.	 A	little	girl,	 standing	 near	the	throne,	giggled.	Ekalavya	stared	at	her,
anger	burning	in	his	eyes.	‘Even	the	little	ones	of	these	high-castes	make	fun	of
us,’	 he	 thought.	 But	 the	 little	 girl	 smiled	 at	 him,	 dimples	 leaping	 into	 her
cheeks.	 With	 the	 chains	 removed,	 the	 thought	 of	 fleeing	 flashed	 though
Ekalavya’s	 mind.	 No,	 he	 was	 exhausted.	 Months	 of	 imprisonment	 had	 sapped
his	strength.	His	body	could	not	follow	his	mind	as	quickly	as	he	wanted	it	to.
He	would	have	to	bear	the	humiliation	for	some	time.
“I	have	been	trying	to	trace	you	for	a	long	time,	Ekalavya,	in	fact,	from	the	day
you	gave	Drona	your	gurudakshina,”	Suyodhana	said.
Ekalavya	quickly	covered	his	mutilated	hand	with	his	other	one.	“So	you	have
not	finished	having	fun	with	us,	eh?”	Ekalavya	smiled	at	the	gasps	in	the	Sabha.
It	 felt	 good	 talking	 back	 to	 the	 mighty	 Crown	 Prince.	 Perhaps	 he	 only	 had	 a
few	minutes	to	live	but	he	was	determined	to	go	down	with	his	head	held	high.
“You	think	you	have	defeated	us?	Krishna	thinks	he	has	escaped.	You	may	kill
me,	 but	 one	 day	 my	 people	 will	 rise	 and	 sweep	 you	 into	 the	 Ganga.	 You	 can
kill	me	now,	but	how	many	Ekalavyas	will	you	kill,	Duryodhana?	The	forests

of	this	country	are	pregnant	with	revolution.	There	are	thousands	of	Ekalavyas
rising.”
“Ekalavya,	I	wish	to	stop	the	revolution.”
“The	 entire	 army	 of	 Hastinapura	 and	 all	 the	 great	 warriors	 here	 will	 not	 be
able	to	stop	it,	Prince.”
“I	do	not	wish	to	stop	it	by	force.	I	know	I	cannot	do	that.	I	wish	to	stop	it	by...”
“By	 acting	 nice	 and	 throwing	 us	 some	 tidbits?	 Ha,	 I	 would	 rather	 face	 your
cousin	Arjuna’s	arrows	than	your	patronising	acts.”
“You	 feel	 proud	 to	 be	 rude,	 Nishada?	 I	 am	 merely	 extending	 my	 hand	 in
friendship.”
“Are	you	so	desperate	to	prove	yourself	a	good	man,	Prince?	You	think	I	will
fall	 for	 such	 petty	 tricks?	 You	 are	 preparing	 for	 a	 war	 against	 your	 cousins.
You	 think	 one	 more	 warrior,	 even	 without	 a	 thumb,	 will	 be	 useful	 against
Arjuna?	 Do	 you	 want	 to	 know	 what	 we	 think	 about	 your	 fight	 with	 your
cousins?	We	think	that	it	is	a	sham.	Whoever	wins,	our	plight	will	remain	the
same.”
“I	am	the	only	person	who	has	stood	up	for	your	people.”
Ekalavya	 watched	 Suyodhana	 flush	 with	 anger.	 His	 ghost	 thumb	 itched
savagely.	 “Where	 were	 you,	 Prince,	 when	 my	 aunt	 and	 cousins	 were	 burned
like	 chickens	 in	 the	 trap	 you	 set	 for	 your	 cousins?	 What	 did	 you	 do	 when
Arjuna	 murdered	 thousands	 of	 helpless	 women	 and	 children	 to	 build
Indraprastha?	 Had	 your	 nobility	 gone	 into	 hiding	 then?	 Where	 were	 all	 the
mighty	 warriors	 –	 the	 righteous	 Bhishma,	 the	 great	 Guru	 Dronacharya,	 the
noble	 Suyodhana,	 the	 wise	 Vidhura,	 and	 Dhanaveera	 Dharmaveera	 Karna?
Where	were	all	of	you	when	our	people	were	dying	in	the	forest	fire	or	being
shot	by	Arjuna’s	arrows?	Not	a	man	raised	his	voice	to	say	it	was	adharma,	not
one	woman	of	this	noble	land	shed	a	tear!”	“I	have	tried	to	make	amends.	The
Pandavas	have	been	exiled.”
“Ha,	you	tricked	them,	not	because	you	felt	sorry	for	our	people	but	because	a
woman	 laughed	 at	 you.	 Do	 not	 make	 your	 battle	 with	 cousins	 to	 be	 some

cosmic	fight	between	dharma	and	adharma.	Do	you	think	the	common	people
cannot	see	through	it?	These	are	cheap	political	ploys	for	power	to	crush	the
weak	 and	 oppress	 the	 common	 people.	 The	 Pandavas	 bow	 to	 the	 Brahmins
because	they	think	they	will	get	their	support	in	their	war	against	you.	You	have
already	lost	the	support	of	the	priestly	class,	so	you	have	come	to	us,	thinking
we	 will	 shed	 our	 worthless	 blood	 for	 you.	 Do	 you	 think	 you	 can	 sit	 on	 the
throne	and	claim	you	are	our	saviour?	Think	again,	Prince;	we	live	in	different
worlds.”
“Another	word	from	your	uncouth	mouth	and	you	are	dead,	Nishada.”	Karna’s
sword	was	pressed	against	Ekalavya’s	throat,	his	eyes	glittering.	He	looked	at
Suyodhana	for	permission	to	plunge	in	the	sword	and	silence	the	Nishada,	but
Suyodhana	was	looking	away,	his	eyes	clouded	with	shame.
“Go	ahead,	Suta,	show	your	loyalty,”	said	Ekalavya,	facing	Karna	calmly.	The
sword	pressed	into	the	Nishada’s	skin	and	a	drop	of	blood	appeared.
“Karna,	drop	your	sword!	He	has	the	right	to	speak	in	this	Sabha.	If	I	do	not
listen	to	the	voice	of	my	own	people,	what	kind	of	King	will	I	be?	Free	him!”
Suyodhana	 waited	 until	 Karna	 reluctantly	 returned	 his	 sword	 to	 its	 scabbard
and	then	turned	to	Ekalavya.	“I	do	not	know	what	force	prompts	me	to	act	the
way	I	do.	Perhaps	I	am	a	selfish	man,	who	has	done	many	things	wrong	to	gain
power.	But	power	is	my	birthright.	I	am	the	firstborn	of	the	King	and	no	one
can	take	that	right	from	me.	I	was	wrong	to	disrobe	Draupadi,	I	admit	it	to	my
eternal	shame.	But	I	will	not	accept	being	called	evil	by	my	cousins	and	their
sycophants.	I	do	not	have	the	blood	of	innocent	people	on	my	hands	as	they	do.
Your	 aunt	 and	 cousins,	 the	 thousands	 that	 were	 slain	 in	 Khandivaprastha,	 the
blood	 of	 King	 Jarasandha	 and	 your	 father	 Hiranyadhanus,	 the	 list	 is	 endless,
yet	I	am	called	the	evil	one,	not	my	cousins	Pandavas.	Ironic,	is	it	not?”
“Have	 you	 dragged	 me	 here	 to	 listen	 to	 your	 justifications,	 Prince?	 We	 have
suffered	enough	because	of	the	power	struggle	between	you	Kuru	cousins.	Our
people	are	desperate	and	many	among	us	think	Takshaka	is	the	answer	to	our
problems.	 I	 know	 Takshaka,	 and	 I	 know	 what	 will	 happen	 if	 his	 revolution
wins.	We	are	caught	between	you.”
“I	 will	 make	 amends,	 not	 only	 for	 my	 silence	 when	 my	 cousins	 razed
Khandivaprastha,	but	also	for	the	wrongs	done	to	your	people.	I	will	make	you

King	of	all	the	forest	lands	in	Hastinapura’s	domain.”
The	 assembly	 broke	 into	 an	 uproar.	 Even	 Karna	 looked	 shocked.	 Ekalavya
watched	 Karna’s	 reaction	 before	 replying.	 Perhaps	 the	 Suta	 was	 thinking	 he
was	not	as	special	as	he	had	thought.	Suyodhana	had	gone	one	step	further	than
he	had	done	with	the	Suta,	and	dared	to	offer	kingship	to	a	Nishada.	‘But	I	am
no	 Suta	 to	 wag	 my	 tail	 before	 the	 master,’	 Ekalavya	 thought	 to	 himself.	 He
rubbed	 his	 chin	 with	 his	 mutilated	 right	 hand	 and	 smiled	 when	 he	 saw
Suyodhana	wince.	The	thumbless	hand	had	that	effect	on	most	people.
“Are	you	trying	to	buy	me	off,	Prince?	Who	are	you	to	make	me	King	of	my
own	lands?	Your	writ	does	not	run	in	the	deep	forests	of	this	country.	The	only
power	you	have	over	me	is	to	kill	me	now.	I	have	faced	death	and	far	greater
humiliation	than	you	can	subject	me	to.	You	hold	no	power	over	me.	You	can
bestow	nothing	on	me.”
“Suyodhana,	 will	 you	 allow	 this	 arrogant	 Nishada	 to	 insult	 you	 like	 this?”
Karna’s	 hand	 was	 once	 again	 on	 his	 sword.	 Jayadratha	 and	 Sushasana	 also
moved	closer	to	the	Nishada,	ready	to	pounce	on	him	at	the	slightest	nod	from
Suyodhana.
“Karna,	 we	 can	 silence	 one	 Nishada	 here.	 Can	 we	 silence	 the	 entire	 country?
We	have	thirteen	years	until	my	cousins	return	and	stake	a	claim	to	my	throne.	I
know	war	will	come,	but	I	do	not	intend	to	allow	them	to	take	what	is	not	theirs.
Meanwhile,	 I	 am	 determined	 to	 prove	 I	 am	 fit	 to	 rule	 this	 land.	 I	 will	 not	 be
bound	by	mindless	rules	and	traditions.	I	will	listen	to	the	voice	of	the	people.
He	 is	 that	 voice.	 I	 will	 not	 silence	 him.	 Yes,	 I	 want	 power.	 I	 am	 no	 God,	 nor
claim	 to	 be	 the	 son	 of	 one.	 My	 parents	 are	 mortals,	 blind	 at	 that.	 Ekalavya’s
words	 have	 made	 me	 realise	 I	 was	 more	 concerned	 about	 the	 insult	 from
Draupadi	 than	 the	 mass	 murder	 Arjuna	 committed	 in	 Khandiva;	 more
concerned	about	clearing	my	name	in	the	house	of	lac	incident	than	about	the
lives	 of	 the	 Nishada	 woman	 and	 her	 children	 who	 perished	 in	 it.	 Does	 that
make	me	evil?	Perhaps	it	does.	Does	it	make	me	more	evil	than	the	ones	who
actually	committed	those	acts?	That	is	for	posterity	to	decide.
“All	my	acts	are	selfish,	including	our	friendship,	Karna.	Every	act	of	love	is
selfish.	I	believe	that	when	the	time	comes,	you	will	stand	by	my	side.	So	will
Jayadratha,	Aswathama	and	Sushasana.	I	believe	that	all	my	brothers	will	stand

by	me,	not	because	I	am	righteous	or	the	epitome	of	dharma,	which	I	am	not,
but	because	you	love	me	as	a	man	and	a	friend.	I	offer	the	same	friendship	to
you,	Ekalavya.	It	is	for	you	to	accept	or	reject	it.	Whatever	your	decision,	you
will	 leave	 here	 a	 free	 man.	 I	 cannot	 promise	 what	 will	 happen	 tomorrow;
perhaps	 as	 a	 ruler	 I	 may	 order	 your	 death	 or	 capture,	 but	 today	 you	 have	 a
choice.”
Ekalavya	 was	 thrown	 into	 confusion.	 Was	 this	 a	 trap?	 Was	 the	 offer	 of
friendship	nothing	but	a	bait	by	the	Prince,	the	usual	one	set	by	the	elite	to	trap
the	poor?	Ekalavya	tried	to	hide	his	emotions	but	found	it	difficult	to	mask	his
happiness.	 Was	 this	 not	 what	 he	 had	 always	 yearned	 for,	 to	 be	 accepted	 like
Karna	by	the	same	society	that	had	made	him	toil	to	put	together	his	shattered
ambition?	Yet,	in	a	corner	of	his	mind,	something	nagged	at	him;	his	primeval
instincts	told	him	it	was	a	big	mistake	to	align	himself	with	the	Crown	Prince.
“I	 will	 accept	 your	 offer	 on	 my	 own	 terms	 –	 you	 will	 not	 interfere	 in	 our
affairs;	 there	 will	 be	 no	 killing	 of	 Nagas,	 Nishadas,	 Kiratas	 or	 any	 forest
dwellers;	 you	 will	 grant	 me	 freedom	 to	 rule	 as	 I	 deem	 fit;	 and	 in	 the	 areas	 I
rule,	no	varna	or	jati	system	will	be	accepted.”
“I	 agree,	 but	 on	 one	 condition.	 When	 required,	 you	 and	 your	 people	 will
support	me.”
“You	will	have	to	earn	it,	Prince.	You	are	acting	in	your	selfish	interests	and	I
in	mine.”
“Suyodhana,”	Karna	said	in	a	horrified	voice,	“do	not	accept	such	terms	from
this	 man.	 He	 is	 our	 captive.	 You	 cannot	 go	 against	 all	 the	 accepted	 norms	 of
our	 society.	 I	 have	 given	 my	 word	 to	 Guru	 Parashurama	 that	 we	 will	 make
amends	and	try	to	win	back	the	acceptance	of	the	Brahmins.	We	have	become
villains	to	many	people	by	disrobing	Draupadi	and	sending	the	Pandavas	into
exile.”
“What	 are	 you	 afraid	 of,	 Karna?	 Is	 not	 my	 friendship	 enough?	 Why	 do	 you
yearn	so	much	for	universal	acceptance?	I	find	your	tone	since	returning	from
the	South	quite	disheartening.	I	do	not	fear	society.	We	must	make	new	norms.	I
did	wrong	by	Draupadi,	but	let	no	one	use	that	as	a	tool	to	brand	me	as	evil.	I
have	no	regrets.	I	did	it	for	you.	I	did	it	for	my	bruised	ego.	Yudhishtra	was	a

fool	 who	 gambled	 everything,	 including	 his	 wife,	 and	 lost.	 I	 prefer	 being
called	evil	to	being	known	as	a	fool.”
“Did	I	suggest	you	disrobe	Draupadi?”	Karna	asked	indignantly.
“Stop	this	and	decide	what	to	do	with	this	Nishada,”	Sushasana	said,	moving	to
stand	between	Karna	and	Suyodhana.
“I	accept	your	terms.	I	will	crown	you	a	vassal	King	for	all	the	forest	lands	and
their	 inhabitants.	 We	 will	 have	 the	 coronation	 here,	 today.”	 Ignoring	 the
murmurs	 that	 rose	 in	 the	 Sabha,	 Suyodhana	 turned	 to	 a	 guard.	 “Summon
Acharya	Kripa.	Tell	him	Suyodhana	is	making	a	Nishada	a	King.	Request	him
to	conduct	the	ceremony	as	per	the	Vedic	rites.”
“Brother,	we	are	forgetting	that	one	of	us	has	not	come	back	from	Gandhara.
When	are	we	going	to	do	something	about	it?”	Sushasana	asked	and	the	Sabha
fell	silent.
“Karna	has	returned	and	the	Confederate	has	been	crushed.	Pitamaha	will	keep
his	word	to	me.	So	we	will	leave	for	Gandhara	soon.	More	than	Aswathama,	I
wish	to	meet	my	Uncle	Shakuni.	I	have	a	few	questions	for	him.”
The	arrival	of	the	Prime	Minister	cut	off	Suyodhana.	Vidhura	stood	under	the
massive	arch	of	the	door,	his	eyes	red	with	fatigue	and	anger.	Ekalavya	could
see	 the	 Prime	 Minister	 was	 seething	 inside.	 He	 walked	 in	 and	 eyed	 the	 Sabha
with	 distaste.	 Suyodhana	 bowed	 low.	 Taking	 their	 cue	 from	 him,	 the	 entire
Sabha	bowed	to	the	Prime	Minister.
Vidhura	 deposited	 the	 cloth	 bag	 he	 was	 carrying	 on	 a	 table.	 “Your	 Highness,
here	are	the	official	seals	of	the	empire.”
“What	is	the	meaning	of	all	this,	Uncle?”
“Your	 Highness,	 these	 are	 the	 Royal	 Insignia	 of	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 of
Hastinapura	 and	 the	 Prime	 Minister.	 May	 God	 be	 with	 you.”	 Vidhura	 walked
out	of	the	stunned	assembly,	his	head	held	high.
For	 a	 moment	 there	 was	 pindrop	 silence,	 then	 Suyodhana	 pushed	 Ekalavya
away	 and	 called	 out	 to	 the	 fast	 vanishing	 form	 of	 the	 ex-Prime	 Minister.	 But

Vidhura	hurried	away,	neither	answering,	nor	turning	back.
“Where	is	Pitamaha?”	Visibly	agitated,	Suyodhana	rushed	out.
The	Sabha	rapidly	emptied,	leaving	Ekalavya	standing	alone,	feeling	ignored
and	 unimportant.	 He	 wondered	 about	 the	 strange	 relationship	 Karna	 had	 with
Suyodhana.	 Did	 Karna	 ever	 feel	 equal	 to	 the	 blue-blooded	 Prince?	 Did
Suyodhana	 cultivate	 the	 Suta	 merely	 for	 his	 own	 selfish	 ends?	 It	 had	 shaken
Ekalavya	 that	 the	 Prince	 had	 agreed	 to	 his	 allegations	 of	 selfishness.
Suyodhana’s	 frank	 acceptance	 of	 his	 self-interest	 made	 him	 somehow	 more
likeable.	But	he	would	never	be	a	slave	to	Suyodhana,	like	Karna.	They	were
emotional	fools.
Ekalavya	 was	 shaken	 from	 his	 reverie	 by	 a	 sharp	 punch	 to	 his	 stomach.	 “My
father	 is	 a	 good	 man.”	 A	 little	 girl	 was	 standing	 waist-high	 before	 him	 with
clenched	fists.	She	dared	him	to	contradict	her,	ready	to	throw	another	punch.
Ekalavya	burst	out	laughing.	The	girl	punched	him	with	all	her	strength.
“Who	are	you,	young	lady?	Why	are	you	punching	me?	Ouch!	That	hurt;	you
are	a	strong	woman,”	Ekalavya	said,	trying	to	hide	his	amusement	by	clutching
the	belly	the	little	hands	had	pummelled.
“You	will	get	more	if	you	fight	with	my	father.	You	will	become	chutney.	Why
do	you	call	my	father	names,	you	black	monster?	Bhuta,	that	is	what	you	are,	a
black	bhuta.”
“Who	is	your	father,	little	one?”
“Suyodhana,	Crown	Prince	of	Hastinapura.	I	am	Princess	Lakshmana.	And	you
are	not	supposed	to	address	me	in	that	way.	Also,	you	must	bow	to	me.”
“My	apologies,	Princess	Lakshmana.”	Ekalavya	knelt	on	both	knees	and	bowed
low.	 “I	 do	 not	 bow	 to	 anyone,	 not	 even	 to	 the	 King	 or	 your	 father,	 but	 I	 will
make	an	exception.	I	will	bow	to	you.”
“Hmm,	 I	 forgive	 you.	 Next	 time	 bow	 when	 we	 meet.	 Why	 did	 you	 call	 my
father	an	evil	man?”
“Princess,	I	did	not	call	him	that.”

“Are	you	really	a	bhuta?”
“Yes.	I	am	a	bhuta	of	the	dark	forests.”
“Do	you	belong	to	the	bhutaganas	of	Lord	Shiva?”
“Princess,	I	am	Lord	Shiva.”
Lakshmana	 peered	 at	 him	 intently	 and	 Ekalavya	 bit	 his	 lips	 to	 control	 his
laughter.	 A	 little	 boy	 who	 was	 playing	 with	 a	 toy	 cart	 nearby	 looked	 up	 at
hearing	the	name	of	Shiva	and	walked	towards	them.
“No,	 you	 are	 lying.	 You	 are	 not	 wearing	 the	 snake	 necklace,”	 pointed	 out
Lakshmana.
“Oh,	I	left	it	in	the	forest.	It	has	gone	to	visit	other	Nagas.”
Lakshmana’s	 gaze	 travelled	 down	 and	 stopped	 at	 Ekalavya’s	 mutilated	 hand.
The	 Nishada	 quickly	 tried	 to	 hide	 it,	 embarrassed	 by	 his	 imperfection.
Suddenly	 he	 became	 aware	 of	 his	 position.	 He	 was	 a	 low-caste	 untouchable,
chatting	 with	 the	 Princess	 of	 the	 empire,	 in	 the	 Sabha.	 In	 earlier	 times,	 they
would	have	purified	the	place	he	had	stepped	on	with	cow	dung.	Now	he	stood
free	inside	the	most	important	building	in	all	of	Bharatavarsha.
“You	do	not	have	a	thumb.	Show	me,	show	me.”
“No.”
“Please	show	me.”	Lakshmana	grabbed	Ekalavya’s	hand.
Reluctantly	 the	 Nishada	 opened	 his	 palm.	 He	 felt	 annoyed;	 the	 Princess	 was
making	fun	of	him.	He	wanted	to	run	from	this	sickening	place.
“It	must	have	hurt	you	so	much!”
More	 than	 you	 could	 ever	 imagine,	 Princess.	 More	 than	 any	 one	 of	 you	 will
every	feel.	Ekalavya	tried	to	pull	his	hand	away,	but	the	little	girl	held	it	tight
between	her	own.	He	looked	around,	embarrassed.	He	was	an	untouchable	and
the	 Princess	 was	 holding	 his	 hand.	 That	 hand...	 If	 anyone	 came	 in	 and	 said

something	to	him	now,	he	would	kill	him,	the	Nishada	vowed.	For	a	moment
he	 thought	 of	 shoving	 the	 little	 girl	 away	 and	 running	 off.	 The	 ghost	 thumb
itched.
Shocking	him,	Lakshmana	kissed	his	hand.	Despite	himself,	tears	welled	in	the
Nishada’s	 eyes.	 “That	 should	 make	 you	 fine.	 That	 is	 what	 my	 mother	 does
when	I	get	hurt.”
“I	will	never	let	you	get	hurt,	my	Princess,”	Ekalavya	said	hoarsely.	He	looked
away,	 not	 wanting	 her	 to	 see	 his	 tears.	 He	 smiled	 bitterly.	 All	 those	 years	 of
hard	 struggle	 and	 fighting,	 and	 now	 a	 little	 girl	 had	 broken	 all	 his	 defences
with	her	dimpled	smile.
“How	did	it	happen?”	Lakshmana	asked	innocently.
“It	is	a	long	story	and	you	will	fall	asleep.”
“Oh,	but	I	love	stories.	Please	tell	me	the	story.”
“It	is	a	sad	story	and	you	do	not	want	to	hear	it.”
“Oh	yes,	I	do,”	she	insisted,	trying	to	shove	aside	the	little	boy	who	had	sidled
up	to	her,	his	eyes	wide	in	anticipation	of	a	story.
“Oh	do	not	mind	him,	he	is	my	brother,	Lakshmana	Kumara.	Please	tell	me	the
story.”	 Lakshmana	 sat	 down	 and	 her	 brother	 followed	 her	 example.	 The
children	 looked	 at	 the	 Nishada	 eagerly.	 Reluctantly,	 Ekalavya	 sat	 down.	 The
children	smiled	at	each	other,	clapping	their	hands	in	glee.
While	Suyodhana	faced	Bhishma	in	another	wing	of	the	palace,	the	Nishada	sat
with	 the	 Prince	 and	 Princess	 in	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 Sabha	 and	 started	 his	 story.
“Once	there	was	a	Nishada	boy	who	wanted	to	be	an	archer,	but	he	was	so	poor
that	he	starved	on	most	days.	One	day,	when	he	thought	he	would	die	of	hunger,
he	entered	the	palace	grounds	to	steal	some	mangoes.	There	he	met	a	Prince,
an	evil	Prince...”
*****

19			THE	MERCHANT
	
SUYODHANA	 DID	 HIS	 UTMOST	to	persuade	Bhishma	and	Vidhura	to	change	their

stand,	 but	 they	 remained	 adamant	 about	 resigning	 from	 their	 respective
positions.	 Bhishma	 then	 advised	 Suyodhana	 to	 forget	 about	 Aswathama	 in
Gandhara	 and	 get	 on	 with	 ruling	 the	 country.	 This	 resulted	 in	 yet	 another
argument	between	the	Patriarch	and	the	hot-blooded	Crown	Prince.
Finally,	when	Bhishma	realised	that	Suyodhana	would	not	heed	his	advice,	he
sighed	wearily	and	said,	“If	you	see	Shakuni,	do	not	stop	to	ask	questions;	cut
off	his	head	and	bring	it	to	me.	This	is	the	only	thing	I	ask	for	the	long	years	I
have	served	this	country.”
Suyodhana	 was	 surprised	 by	 Bhishma’s	 anger.	 But	 he	 understood	 the	 pain	 of
betrayal;	Shakuni	had	done	it	to	himself.	There	was	no	time	to	waste,	he	had	to
see	 his	 father	 and	 get	 his	 permission	 to	 mount	 an	 attack	 on	 Gandhara.
Suyodhana	 bowed	 to	 the	 Patriach	 and	 hurried	 towards	 his	 father ’s	 chamber.
When	 he	 thought	 about	 Bhishma’s	 words,	 he	 began	 to	 feel	 doubt	 gnawing	 at
him.	 Would	 he	 have	 the	 courage	 to	 cut	 off	 the	 head	 of	 the	 man	 he	 had	 once
trusted	and	loved?	Perhaps,	if	Aswathama	was	dead,	he	would	be	able	to	do	it.
But	if	Aswathama	was	still	alive?	Suyodhana	had	no	answer.
***
“No	one	would	dare	touch	my	son.	He	is	the	Crown	Prince,	Gandhari.	I	will	not
allow	 him	 to	 suffer	 my	 fate.	 No	 one	 with	 a	 sweet	 tongue	 and	 poisoned	 heart
will	steal	his	birthright,	like	they	did	mine.	Have	you	heard,	the	Suta	conquered
all	of	Bharatavarsha?	My	son	did	well	by	choosing	him	for	a	friend,	without
bothering	about	his	caste	and	lineage.	Karna	has	returned	victorious,	and	I	am
now	Emperor	of	a	land	stretching	from	the	snow-capped	Himalayas	to	the	seakissed	Kumari.”

“I	wish	Suyodhana	had	not	befriended	that	Suta.	It	has	made	him	unacceptable
to	 many	 powerful	 men.	 And	 now	 he	 has	 made	 a	 Nishada	 King	 of	 the	 forest
lands.”
“Bah,	Gandhari!	Who	cares	for	the	opinion	of	a	few	priests	who	know	nothing
about	warfare?	Such	matters	concern	only	Kshatriyas.	I	admire	the	Suta’s	pluck
in	 challenging	 Arjuna.	 I	 can	 sympathise	 with	 him,	 for	 I	 see	 myself	 in	 him.	 I
have	told	you	before	but	I	shall	tell	you	again	now,	they	would	keep	me	away
from	arms;	hiding	the	swords,	maces,	bows	and	arrows	from	me	when	I	was	a
little	boy.	I	would	sit	in	a	corner	of	the	practice	grounds,	beside	the	idol	of	Kali
Ma,	nibbling	on	the	sweets	the	servants	gave	me	to	keep	me	amused	so	that	I
would	not	disturb	the	practice	of	my	brother	Pandu.	I	was	blind	and	could	get
hurt,	they	told	me.	So	I	was	kept	away,	while	my	brother	was	trained	by	none
other	than	Bhishma	Pitamaha.”
Dhritarashtra	stood	up	and	walked	to	the	iron	replica	of	Bhima.	Caressing	it,
he	 allowed	 his	 fingers	 to	 linger	 on	 the	 dents	 his	 mace	 had	 made	 in	 the	 iron
body.	 “Whenever	 Pitamaha	 left	 us	 alone,	 Pandu	 would	 challenge	 me,	 making
fun	of	my	clumsiness.	He	was	not	cruel,	he	was	just	being	a	boy,	but	at	the	time,
it	 hurt.	 It	 still	 does.	 I	 had	 my	 pride	 and	 was	 not	 one	 to	 back	 away	 from	 a
challenge.	The	same	blood	of	the	great	emperor	Bharata	flowed	in	my	veins,
as	it	did	in	Pandu’s.	For	the	first	few	years,	he	would	lick	me	in	every	fight	and
scream	 with	 joy,	 sitting	 on	 my	 chest.	 The	 servants	 would	 watch	 with
amusement,	 commenting	 on	 my	 handsome	 brother	 and	 expressing	 sympathy
for	 my	 blindness.	 More	 than	 anything	 else,	 the	 sympathy	 hurt.	 Unknown	 to
anyone,	 I	 began	 practising	 by	 myself.	 When	 the	 mace	 fell	 on	 my	 foot,	 when
swords	and	daggers	cut	my	fingers,	or	the	strings	of	bows	snapped	and	lashed
my	face,	I	refused	to	cry.	I	was	a	Kshatriya!	I	am	not	a	learned	man	but	I	was
determined	to	beat	my	brother,	my	handicap	notwithstanding.	After	all,	I	was	to
be	the	next	King	and	kings	were	the	best	warriors	of	all.”
Gandhari	did	not	speak.	She	had	heard	it	all	many	times	before.	The	tale	never
failed	to	move	her	to	tears.	If	not	for	such	stories,	she	would	have	gone	back	to
Gandhara	long	ago.
“I	 got	 better	 and	 better.	 Five	 years	 later,	 built	 like	 an	 ox,	 I	 could	 shoot	 better
than	 him,	 fight	 better	 with	 a	 mace,	 and	 defeat	 him	 in	 hand-to-hand	 combat.
What	I	lacked	in	eyesight,	I	made	up	with	iron	will	and	my	other	senses.	On	the

day	 of	 our	 graduation,	 I	 demonstrated	 my	 skill	 in	 front	 of	 all	 the	 citizens	 of
Hastinapura.	An	elephant	had	run	amok	that	day,	trampling	men	and	horses.	I
was	in	the	middle	of	the	arena,	a	blind	man	with	a	mace.	Even	now	I	can	hear
the	 terrified	 screams	 of	 the	 spectators.	 To	 his	 credit,	 Pandu	 ran	 to	 stand
between	the	charging	elephant	and	me.	I	heard	the	crowd	groan	as	his	arrows
missed	 the	 elephant’s	 head.	 The	 beast	 was	 so	 close	 that	 I	 could	 smell	 it.	 I
jumped	onto	my	brother ’s	shoulders	and	crashed	my	mace	on	the	beast’s	head.
The	elephant	collapsed.	I	waited	for	the	crowd	to	cheer.	They	did,	but	it	was	for
Pandu.	 In	 the	 split	 second	 between	 my	 blow	 and	 the	 elephant	 falling,	 he	 had
pierced	 his	 sword	 into	 the	 elephant’s	 mouth.	 Pitamaha	 declared	 that	 Pandu’s
sword	 had	 killed	 the	 beast,	 and	 that	 he	 had	 saved	 his	 blind,	 helpless	 brother.
The	 Magadhas	 and	 Sutas	 sang	 of	 Pandu’s	 bravery,	 when	 anyone	 with	 some
knowledge	 of	 elephants	 knew	 a	 beast	 that	 size	 could	 not	 die	 with	 a	 sword
thrust,	certainly	not	immediately.	It	was	my	mace	that	killed	it.”
Dhritarashtra	took	a	deep	breath.	He	did	not	speak	for	some	time.	Then,	with	a
sudden	show	of	anger,	he	slammed	his	fist	on	the	wall.	“I	saved	my	brother	but
there	were	no	songs	about	my	courage.	He	was	the	hero.	And	that	was	just	the
beginning.	 I	 was	 cursed	 with	 blindness,	 so	 I	 did	 not	 deserve	 the	 throne,	 even
though	I	was	the	firstborn,	they	said.	How	could	a	blind	man	lead	the	country	in
a	war,	they	asked.	My	brother	edged	past	me,	making	me	a	figure	of	pity.	I	was
cheated	 at	 birth,	 but	 it	 did	 not	 stop	 me	 from	 eventually	 becoming	 King.	 Fate
and	destiny	interfered	in	mysterious	ways.”
A	wicked	smile	played	on	Dhritarashtra	lips,	“God	has	a	way	of	looking	after
people	like	me,	Gandhari,	men	who	are	shunned	by	all	for	no	fault	of	theirs.
Men	like	Karna	cannot	die	unless	they	are	broken	from	within.	We	do	not	need
the	crutch	of	scriptures	to	prop	us	up.	I	am	proud	of	Suyodhana	for	standing	by
Karna.	I	know	that	many,	including	Pitamaha,	wish	Karna	dead.	Why	did	you
turn	your	head	when	I	said	that?	Do	not	deny	you	turned	your	head,	for	I	can
sense	 your	 movements,	 my	 dear.	 You	 are	 surprised,	 Gandhari?	 I	 know	 many
things,	I	who	act	like	a	fool	and	act	as	if	I	were	helpless	without	Pitamaha	and
the	other	nobles.	They	all	imagine	I	am	as	helpless	as	a	calf	gone	astray,	and
would	 never	 survive	 alone	 in	 this	 cruel	 world,	 nor	 win.	 But	 I	 have	 my	 own
spies	 and	 I	 keep	 a	 close	 watch	 on	 things	 happening	 around	 me.	 Don’t	 laugh,
there	are	ways	to	watch	without	eyes.”
Dhritarashtra	 leaned	 towards	 his	 wife,	 his	 face	 inches	 from	 hers.	 “Do	 you

know	 why	 I	act	like	a	weakling?	The	moment	 I	show	I	can	stand	on	my	own
without	their	support,	they	will	conspire	against	me.	I	play	a	part	so	they	can
imagine	it	is	they	who	are	running	the	kingdom.	I	know	Bhishma,	and	I	know
he	rues	the	day	he	relinquished	the	kingdom.	I	humour	him	by	saying	foolish
things	 and	 posing	 as	 if	 I	 cannot	 take	 decisions,	 so	 that	 he	 feels	 powerful	 and
important.	 In	 this	 way	 I	 keep	 the	 courtiers	 at	 bay,	 so	 they	 do	 not	 replace	 me
with	someone	else.	Who	knows,	they	could	even	appoint	Vidhura	King	if	they
found	 out	 what	 I	 really	 thought	 of	 them.	 After	 all,	 we	 share	 the	 same	 father.
They	 would	 find	 some	 scriptures	 to	 justify	 even	 that.	 Of	 course,	 I	 know
Vidhura	 would	 not	 be	 happy	 with	 such	 a	 decision.	 He	 is	 truly	 pious.	 Our
scriptures	can	be	interpreted	to	suit	what	a	few	priests	want,	so	I	do	not	take	any
risks,	at	least	not	till	Suyodhana	can	take	over.	Now	call	him	and	give	him	the
benefit	of	your	valuable	advice	and	let	me	play	the	affable	fool.”
Dhritarashtra	took	up	the	mace	and	began	hitting	the	iron	sculpture	again.	For
the	first	time	Gandhari	realised	she	had	not	married	a	fool,	but	it	did	not	make
her	feel	happy.	It	made	things	more	difficult.	She	called	out	to	a	guard	to	fetch
the	 Crown	 Prince	 to	 her	 chamber.	 When	 Suyodhana	 arrived,	 an	 intense
argument	ensued	between	mother	and	son.
The	more	Dhritarashtra	heard,	the	more	worried	he	became.	His	son	was	not
practical.	 He	 was	 an	 idealistic	 fool	 who	 valued	 friendships,	 relationships	 and
such	 abstract	 things	 over	 strategy	 and	 practicality.	 He	 loved	 his	 son,	 but	 his
shrewd	mind	told	him	that	people	who	used	the	concept	of	dharma	as	a	weapon
would	 find	 a	 way	 to	 trick	 his	 son.	 They	 would	 paint	 him	 black,	 citing	 his
foolish	act	in	the	Sabha	by	shaming	his	cousins’	wife,	and	make	killing	him	an
act	of	dharma	against	adharma.
The	 same	 people	 had	 once	 cheated	 him	 of	 his	 crown,	 quoting	 obsolete
scriptures,	 and	 they	 would	 do	 it	 again	 to	 his	 son.	 Because	 of	 the	 loyalty	 he
inspired,	and	his	clean	heart,	his	foolish	eldest	son	would	drag	all	his	brothers
and	friends	towards	disaster.	Then	they	would	invite	Pandu’s	son	to	sit	on	the
throne,	his	throne.	No!	He	would	not	place	all	his	bets	on	his	idealistic	son.	He
had	 to	 make	 his	 moves	 carefully.	 None	 but	 his	 own	 blood	 would	 rule
Hastinapura.	 The	 bastard	 sons	 of	 Pandu	 would	 not	 inherit	 at	 any	 cost.	 If	 they
did	 not	 allow	 Suyodhana	 to	 inherit,	 Dhritarashtra	 would	 outmanoeuver	 them.
He	knew	that	he	himself	would	appear	ridiculous	by	doing	what	he	planned	to
do,	but	he	had	played	the	helpless	fool	for	long	enough	to	get	away	with	it.	The

game	 was	 getting	 deadly	 with	 his	 and	 his	 brother ’s	 sons	 sharpening	 their
swords.	They	would	fight	like	lions.	He	needed	to	bring	in	a	vulture.
There	 were	 Brahmins,	 Kshatriya	 and	 Shudras	 on	 both	 sides.	 It	 was	 time	 to
bring	a	Vaishya	into	the	game,	and	who	better	than	the	greatest	of	them	all,	the
merchant	par	excellence	–	Yuyutsu?	In	fact,	he	had	already	written	to	his	son	by
a	Vaishya	woman.	He	had	heard	that	Yuyutsu’s	ships	had	reached	Prabhasa	and
that	 his	 caravan	 was	 on	 its	 way	 to	 Hastinapura.	 This	 was	 not	 the	 first	 time
Yuyutsu	 had	 visited	 him,	 but	 it	 would	 be	 the	 first	 time	 Dhritarashtra
acknowledged	him	as	his	son.	It	was	certain	to	create	problems	with	Gandhari
when	she	realised	he	had	another	son,	by	the	Vaishya	maid	who	had	once	come
to	help	her.	But	Dhritarashtra	knew	he	could	ride	the	storm.	Gandhari	had	too
much	 at	 stake.	 Moreover,	 the	 best	 of	 it	 was	 that	 Yuyutsu	 was	 older	 than	 both
Suyodhana	and	Yudhishtra.	In	other	words,	he	could	stake	a	claim	to	the	throne
of	Hastinapura.	Dhritarashtra	chuckled.	And	this	blind	fool	would	sit	and	watch
the	Gurus	deal	with	his	ace	move.	‘Pandu,	let	us	see	who	wins	the	final	round
and	whose	sons	inherit	Hastinapura.’	Dhritarashtra	began	to	laugh.
Gandhari	 and	 Suyodhana	 stopped	 their	 argument	 and	 turned	 towards	 him	 in
surprise.	“Gandhari,	my	son	will	inherit	the	throne,”	he	said	chuckling.
***
“Father,	it	is	imperative	that	we	go	to	Gandhara,”	Suyodhana	said,	eyeing	his
mother	 sitting	 nearby.	 The	 little	 twitching	 of	 her	 lips	 was	 the	 only	 indication
that	Gandhari	had	heard	her	country	of	birth	mentioned.
“Yes!	Karna	has	won	us	Bharatavarsha.	Go	to	Gandhara,	and	then	Cheenadesa
and	Yavana,	filled	with	those	yellow-haired	Mlechas,	and	capture	them	all.	We
can	 rule	 the	 world.	 I	 will	 request	 Bhishma	 Pitamaha	 to	 lead	 the	 armies,”
Dhritarashtra	said	extravagantly.
“Father...”	Suyodhana	faltered.	“The	Grand	Regent	has	resigned	his	position,	as
has	Uncle	Vidhura.”
“Resigned!	 How	 is	 it	 I	 know	 nothing	 of	 this?”	 Dhritarashtra	 turned	 to
Gandhari,	agitated	and	nervous.	“Why	has	he	resigned?	No,	I	do	not	believe	it.”
He	paused	and	bent	his	head	in	thought.	‘The	old	man	is	jealous.	He	thought	he

would	 always	 rule	 this	 country	 in	 my	 stead.	 He	 always	 sided	 with	 Pandu.
Everyone	 sided	 with	 impotent	 Pandu.	 He	 could	 not	 even	 father	 sons	 and	 yet
they	sided	with	him	and	his	bastard	children!	Pandavas!	They	are	nothing	but
the	sons	of	Kunti	and	Madri.	I	will	show	them	what	my	sons	are	capable	of!”
Raising	 his	 head,	 Dhritarashtra	 tapped	 his	 cane	 on	 the	 floor	 and	 commanded
imperiously,	“Call	Yuyutsu!”
‘Yuyutsu?	 Who	 was	 he?’	 wondered	 Suyodhana.	 Puzzled,	 he	 looked	 at	 his
mother.	Her	fingers	had	curled	into	fists	but	her	face	remained	impassive.
Dhritarashtra	 walked	 up	 and	 down,	 leaning	 on	 his	 stick.	 He	 paused	 when	 he
heard	 footsteps,	 sensing	 the	 newcomer ’s	 presence	 even	 before	 he	 entered	 the
room	 quietly.	 Suyodhana	 watched	 in	 surprise.	 The	 man	 was	 plump,	 had	 a
prosperous	 paunch,	 and	 the	 hair	 on	 his	 head	 had	 started	 receding,	 giving	 a
broad	look	to	his	forehead.
“Strange	thing,	but	his	face	resembles	yours,	Suyodhana,”	Karna	whispered	to
his	friend.
Dhritarashtra	 turned	 to	 his	 sons.	 “Suyodhana,	 Sushasana,	 this	 is	 your	 halfbrother,	Yuyutsu.	He	is	my	son.	His	mother	is	a	Vaishya	woman.	I	have	kept	this
a	 secret,	 even	 from	 your	 mother.	 Now	 he	 has	 come	 here.	 Do	 you	 know	 how
many	 ships	 he	 owns,	 how	 many	 camels	 and	 elephants	 make	 up	 his	 caravans,
how	 many	 countries	 he	 has	 visited?	 I	 have	 fathered	 the	 greatest	 of	 Kshatriya
sons	and	the	best	Vaishya	son	as	well.	I	do	not	need	divine	intervention	to	have
great	sons.”	Dhritarashtra	laughed	aloud.
Yuyutsu	 bent	 to	 touch	 Gandhari’s	 feet.	 She	 reached	 out	 her	 hand	 and	 blessed
him	with	an	instinctive	gesture.
How	 many	 terrible	 secrets	 did	 his	 father	 hold,	 wondered	 Suyodhana	 as	 he
watched	the	scene.	Was	this	yet	another	rival	for	the	throne?
“Prince,	I	am	the	eldest	son	of	the	family,	older	than	even	Yudhishtra,”	Yuyutsu
said	with	a	sly	smile.
Suyodhana’s	 eyes	 glittered	 with	 cold	 dislike.	 He	 did	 not	 trust	 the	 merchant’s
easy	familiarity,	shifting	eyes	and	hollow	smile.

“I	 am	 just	 a	 humble	 merchant,	 a	 Vaishya,	 trying	 to	 make	 a	 living,”	 Yuyutsu
continued	unctuously.
“Well	said,	Yuyutsu,”	Dhritarashtra	said.	“He	could	have	had	the	throne	for	the
asking,	for	he	is	my	eldest	son.	If	I	place	him	at	the	fore,	what	argument	would
the	supporters	of	the	Pandavas	have?	But	Yuyutsu	knows	his	kula	dharma	and
he	will	not	claim	the	throne.”
“Father,	 I	 request	 permission	 to	 use	 the	 imperial	 army	 to	 attack	 Gandhara,”
Suyodhana	said,	completely	ignoring	Yuyutsu.
“Go,	 my	 son.	 If	 you	 require	 it,	 seek	 Yuyutsu’s	 help.	 He	 has	 his	 own	 army	 to
protect	his	merchant	caravans,	which	are	often	five	or	six	yojanas	long.	He	has
a	lakh	of	men	and	a	large	cavalry	at	his	disposal.”
Suyodhana	looked	away.	The	pangs	of	jealousy	were	unbearable.	Another	son!
The	eldest!	A	possible	challenger...	No!	The	throne	was	rightfully	his,	he	would
not	surrender	it	to	any	merchant,	or	even	to	Yudhishtra.	But	a	man	with	his	own
standing	 army,	 possessed	 of	 immense	 wealth,	 was	 dangerous,	 Suyodhana
thought	warily.
Yuyutsu	smiled,	as	if	reading	the	Kaurava	Prince’s	thoughts.	Suyodhana	bowed
his	head	for	his	father ’s	blessings.
“When	you	conquer	Gandhara,	do	not	harm	your	uncle,	no	matter	what	he	has
done.	Bring	Shakuni	here.	He	may	be	in	the	wrong,	but	he	is	the	only	man	who
has	 ever	 understood	 my	 pain.	 All	 the	 others	 conspired	 to	 aid	 Pandu’s	 sons,”
Dhritarashtra	said	quietly.
Suyodhana	moved	to	seek	Gandhari’s	blessing.	He	whispered	to	her,	“Mother,
why	do	you	accept	this	sly	merchant	as	your	step-son?”
“As	 long	 as	 I	 live,	 no	 one	 but	 you,	 my	 son,	 will	 sit	 on	 Hastinapura’s	 throne
after	your	father,”	Gandhari	murmured	in	his	ear.	Suyodhana	kissed	her	on	the
forehead	 and	 turned,	 almost	 bumping	 into	 Yuyutsu	 close	 behind	 him.	 Had	 he
heard	Gandhari’s	words?
The	 merchant	 smiled	 affably	 at	 the	 Prince.	 “If	 you	 require	 my	 support	 with
money,	 men	 or	 arms,	 do	 not	 hesitate	 to	 approach	 me.	 I	 will	 do	 all	 I	 can	 to

help.”
Had	 the	 wretched	 man	 stressed	 that	 last	 word,	 Suyodhana	 wondered	 for	 a
fleeting	moment.	Without	acknowledging	the	merchant’s	words,	he	rushed	out
of	the	chamber,	barking	commands	to	his	soldiers	to	have	the	imperial	army
assembled	quickly.
Karna	hurried	home	to	inform	his	wife	but	was	soon	back,	beaming	with	joy.
He	 had	 become	 the	 father	 of	 a	 son.	 The	 Gods	 were	 smiling	 on	 him.	 He	 was
impatient	to	go,	excited	at	the	thought	of	battle.
Ekalavya	stood	nearby,	caressing	the	best	horse	in	the	stable	and	observing	the
flurry	of	activity.
The	next	morning,	they	were	joined	by	Jayadratha	and	his	men.	The	imperial
army	 began	 its	 journey	 towards	 Gandhara.	 As	 Suyodhana	 sat	 on	 his	 horse,
supervising	 the	 activity,	 a	 wayward	 thought	 nagged	 at	 him	 –	 he	 had	 not	 bid
farewell	to	his	wife	and	children.	He	had	been	too	busy	preparing	for	battle.	It
was	painful	talking	to	Bhanumati	these	days,	her	unceasing	advice...
An	 immense	 caravan	 was	 seen	 approaching	 Hastinapura	 from	 the	 desert,
stretching	as	far	as	the	eye	could	see.	It	carried	more	wealth	than	anyone	could
imagine.	 For	 hours	 it	 kept	 marching	 past	 the	 army	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction.
Yuyutsu’s	merchant	caravan	finally	entered	the	capital.	As	he	rushed	onwards,
Suyodhana	 wondered	 whether	 he	 would	 even	 have	 a	 country	 to	 rule	 when	 he
returned	from	the	bleak	heights	of	Gandhara.
*****

20			FISSURES
	
EKALAVYA’S	 DAGGER	 WAS	 INCHES	 from	 Shakuni’s	 eyes.	 It	 had	 not	 been	 easy	 but

the	 wily	 Gandharan	 had	 finally	 succeeded	 in	 convincing	 his	 people	 to
surrender	 to	 the	 imperial	 army	 after	 a	 sham	 resistance.	 Everything	 had	 gone
according	to	plan.	The	deceit	was	complete,	except	for	the	man	now	waving	his
dagger	 before	 his	 eyes.	 Shakuni	 had	 not	 counted	 on	 the	 Nishada	 being	 in
Suyodhana’s	army.
“Dhanaveera	Karna,	please	ask	your	friend...”
“Shut	up,	Mlecha!”	Ekalavya	pressed	the	tip	of	the	dagger	to	Shakuni’s	eyelid,
drawing	blood.
Where	 had	 this	 merciless	 Nishada	 sprouted	 from,	 wondered	 the	 master
strategist.
“Kill	him,	Nishada,	kill	him!”	Aswathama	shouted.
“I	won	the	Pandava	country	for	you.	I	won	you	Indraprastha.	I	made	them	your
slaves,	Suyodhana,”	Shakuni	pleaded,	his	voice	quavering	in	fear	as	part	of	his
act.
“He	will	talk	his	way	out	of	this,”	Aswathama	said	bitterly.	“Ask	him	where	he
has	hidden	Durjaya.”
“My	 dear	 nephew,	 please...”	 Shakuni	 bent	 over	 and	 screamed	 in	 real	 pain	 as
Ekalavya	 kicked	 him	 in	 the	 groin.	 ‘Just	 wait	 till	 I	 get	 back	 at	 you,	 you
untouchable	vermin,’	he	thought	viciously.
“Ekalavya,	 leave	 him	 alone,”	 Karna	 commanded.	 Shakuni	 closed	 his	 eyes	 in
relief.

“Suyodhana,	ask	him	about	Varanavata,	about	Durjaya,”	Aswathama	insisted.
“Nephew,	hear	me	out,”	Shakuni	gasped.	“I	had	nothing	to	do	with	Varanavata.
It	was	Purochana.”
Aswathama	darted	forward	and	knocked	Shakuni	down.	Karna	stepped	in	and
dragged	the	screaming	Brahmin	off	the	Gandharan.	Shakuni	hoped	his	people
would	keep	calm	and	not	react	rashly.	How	long	would	they	be	able	to	stand	by
and	watch	their	Prince	grovelling	before	these	cow-worshippers?
“King	of	Anga,”	cried	Shakuni,	grabbing	Karna’s	feet,	“have	mercy!	You	won
the	 South,	 you	 won	 Gandhara,	 there	 is	 no	 one	 your	 equal.	 Suyodhana	 will
listen	to	what	you	say,	please...	“
Ekalavya	knelt,	his	knees	pressed	on	Shakuni’s	spine.	He	pulled	back	Shakuni’s
head	by	the	hair,	his	dagger	at	the	Gandhara	Prince’s	throat.	Shakuni	gulped	in
terror,	clutching	at	Karna’s	feet.
“Let	him	go,	Nishada,”	Karna	barked.
“Are	 you	 ordering	 me?”	 Ekalavya	 glared	 at	 the	 Suta,	 pressing	 his	 dagger
deeper.
“Let	him	go,”	Suyodhana	said.
Shakuni	 remained	 tense.	 The	 way	 the	 dagger	 was	 pressed	 to	 his	 throat,	 it
seemed	the	Nishada	might	even	defy	the	Crown	Prince.	Then	the	tension	on	his
hair	 eased	 and	 the	 dagger	 moved	 away	 from	 his	 throat.	 Shakuni	 touched	 his
forehead	 to	 Karna’s	 feet.	 Karna	 lifted	 him	 up	 but	 turned	 away;	 he	 had	 never
cared	for	the	man.
Nevertheless,	 Shakuni	 folded	 his	 hands	 in	 seeming	 gratitude	 as	 Suyodhana
came	 up	 to	 him.	 “Forgive	 your	 uncle,	 Suyodhana.	 I	 have	 always	 had	 your
welfare	 in	 mind.	 I	 want	 you	 to	 sit	 on	 the	 throne	 of	 Hastinapura.	 I	 won	 the
kingdom	for	you	in	the	dice	game	and	you	repay	me	by	sending	your	armies
to	ravish	my	land?	Is	that	fair?”
“Don’t	fall	for	it,	Suyodhana,”	Aswathama	shouted	from	a	distance.

‘The	bloody	Brahmin!	If	not	for	the	ten	warriors	holding	him	back,	he	would
have	 strangled	 me,’	 thought	 Shakuni	 angrily.	 Any	 moment	 Suyodhana	 could
change	 his	 mind.	 He	 should	 have	 killed	 Aswathama	 when	 he	 had	 had	 the
chance.
Suyodhana	 wavered.	 Shakuni	 spoke	 his	 next	 piece.	 “Nephew,	 remember	 what
your	uncle	has	done	for	you.	As	soon	as	the	game	of	dice	was	over,	I	thought
the	 biggest	 threat	 to	 you	 was	 Durjaya	 -	 the	 devil	 was	 trying	 to	 destroy	 the
country.	 I	 received	 information	 he	 had	 moved	 to	 Gandhara	 and	 I	 wanted	 to
capture	 him	 for	 you.	 There	 was	 no	 time	 for	 goodbyes.	 I	 was	 in	 a	 hurry,	 and
Athiratha,	 the	 respected	 father	 of	 His	 Highness	 Karna,	 was	 kind	 enough	 to
saddle	 me	 a	 horse.	 I	 rushed	 here.	 But	 your	 impulsive	 Brahmin	 friend	 here
followed	me,	thinking	me	to	be	a	traitor.	Can	you	imagine	how	painful	that	is
for	me	after	all	that	I	have	done	for	you,	nephew?”
“Lying	 bastard!”	 Aswathama	 wriggled	 free	 from	 the	 men	 holding	 him	 and
rushed	 towards	 Shakuni.	 He	 tried	 to	 punch	 the	 tall	 Gandharan	 but	 Suyodhana
threw	out	an	arm	to	stop	his	friend.
“It	seems	Aswathama	is	still	angry	with	me.	Poor	Brahmin.	I	can	understand	his
frustration.	He	was	rotting	in	Hastinapura	as	an	unimportant	man	and	wanted	to
prove	that	he	too	is	a	warrior.	He	decided	to	attack	my	poor	country	and	I	had
to	 save	 him	 from	 an	 avalanche.	 Why	 can	 he	 not	 accept	 there	 is	 no	 better
warrior	than	Karna?	Even	this	Nishada	here	would	have	become	a	great	archer,
had	 not	 Aswathama’s	 father	 cheated	 him	 of	 his	 destiny.”	 Shakuni	 paused	 and
surveyed	 the	 effect	 of	 his	 words	 on	 the	 group	 of	 men.	 For	 the	 first	 time,
Ekalavya	 looked	 shaken.	 Aswathama	 stood	 in	 stricken	 silence	 and	 Karna
looked	as	if	he	wished	he	were	somewhere	else.
Shakuni	was	ready	with	his	next	move.	“Gambling	is	a	Kshatriya	dharma.	My
only	sin	is	that	I	loved	my	nephew	more	than	myself.	Suyodhana,	do	you	not
wish	to	ride	back	to	Hastinapura	with	Durjaya	in	chains?	Remember	the	death
and	 destruction	 he	 wrought	 in	 Hastinapura.	 Do	 you	 not	 want	 him	 to	 pay	 for
what	he	has	done	to	your	people?”
“Where	is	Durjaya?”	Suyodhana	said	at	last,	weary	to	the	bone.
Shakuni	hurried	off.	He	was	no	longer	a	supplicant	begging	for	his	life,	he	was

the	Prince	of	his	people	again.	As	he	walked	past,	his	soldiers	stood	with	their
heads	bowed	respectfully.	Shakuni	did	not	forget	to	pat	each	one	as	a	gesture	of
gratitude.
The	little	group	soon	reached	a	cave	where	two	soldiers	stood	guard.	Shakuni
gestured	to	them	to	bring	out	Durjaya.	The	guards	emerged,	dragging	out	the
struggling	man.
“Shakuni,	you	cheat!	You	betrayed	me!”	Durjaya	screamed.
Suyodhana	stepped	forward,	looking	down	in	disgust	at	the	grovelling	man	at
his	 feet.	 He	 punched	 and	 kicked	 Durjaya	 till	 the	 thug	 lost	 consciousness.
Shakuni	smiled	at	his	nephew’s	unusual	fury.	When	Suyodhana	finally	moved
away,	Shakuni	followed,	urging	him	to	sit	down	on	a	nearby	boulder.	He	took
the	precious	stone	he	had	shown	Aswathama	from	the	folds	of	his	clothing	and
held	it	up	for	his	nephew	to	see.	The	lustre	of	it	startled	Suyodhana	and	his	eyes
opened	wide.	Shakuni	smiled.
“What	is	it?”	Suyodhana	asked	in	surprise.
“This	 is	 a	 small	 gift	 from	 your	 uncle	 for	 all	 the	 trouble	 he	 has	 caused	 inadvertently	of	course!”
“I	have	no	fancy	for	precious	stones,”	Suyodhana	said,	averting	his	eyes	from
the	tempting	beauty	of	the	gem.
“I	know,	nephew,	 but	you	can	always	 gift	it	to	someone	 dear	 to	you.	Perhaps
Karna,	who	has	won	you	an	empire,	or	to	acknowledge	the	Nishada’s	grit.”
“This	stone	is	too	precious.”
“I	give	it	to	you	gladly,	nephew.”
Suyodhana	reluctantly	took	the	stone	in	the	palm	of	his	hand.	He	could	feel	it
burning	his	skin.	He	looked	at	Karna	standing	nearby.	He	knew	Karna	did	not
covet	 the	 stone,	 only	 his	 appreciation	 and	 friendship.	 The	 Nishada	 too,	 sat	 a
little	 distance	 away	 with	 a	 derisive	 smile,	 chewing	 a	 blade	 of	 grass.	 He	 spat
when	 Suyodhana	 looked	 at	 him	 in	 the	 face.	 He	 had	 no	 need	 of	 gems,	 only
justice.	Suyodhana	knew	he	had	rewarded	them	both.	He	had	made	Karna	King

of	 Anga	 and	 the	 Nishada	 King	 of	 the	 forest	 lands.	 The	 one	 person	 who	 had
always	 stood	 by	 him	 without	 expecting	 anything	 in	 return,	 had	 been
Aswathama.	 Suyodhana	 walked	 over	 to	 the	 Brahmin	 and	 took	 his	 hand	 in	 his
own.	Then	he	pressed	the	shining	stone	into	the	hard	and	calloused	palm.
Shakuni	looked	at	Karna,	and	then	at	the	Nishada,	and	smiled.
*****

21		VICTORS	AND	THE
VANQUISHED
	
IT	 WAS	 A	 SECOND	 HOMECOMING	 for	 the	 Suta	 as	 the	 victorious	 army	 entered	 the

capital	city.	People	thronged	to	see	the	Kaurava	army	drag	Durjaya	through	the
streets	 in	 chains.	Suyodhana	and	Karna	threw	fistfuls	of	coins	into	the	crowd
crazed	 with	 adulation.	 The	 streets	 shook	 with	 cries	 of	 Har	 Har	 Mahadeva!
Yuyutsu,	the	richest	man	in	the	world,	stood	at	the	entrance	of	the	palace,	ready
to	 welcome	 the	 victorious	 Prince	 and	 his	 warrior-friend.	 The	 merchant
showered	the	heroes	with	exotic	perfumes	and	flowers.
Bhishma	 waited	 for	 Suyodhana	 to	 come	 see	 him,	 but	 as	 the	 day	 and	 then	 the
night	 passed,	 he	 was	 once	 again	 reminded	 of	 the	 bitter	 truth	 that	 he	 was	 no
longer	needed.	He	yearned	for	Vidhura’s	company.	He	knew	an	era	had	ended
and	 a	 new	 one	 had	 begun.	 He	 would	 have	 liked	 to	 advise	 Suyodhana	 to	 kill
Durjaya,	but	the	proud	patriarch	was	unsure	whether	the	Prince	would	respect
his	 advice.	 He	 was	 no	 longer	 the	 Grand	 Regent,	 just	 a	 forgotten	 old	 man.
Bhishma	 heard	 Karna’s	 voice	 in	 the	 palace	 garden	 and	 a	 pang	 of	 jealousy
stabbed	his	heart.	The	more	he	fought	it,	the	stronger	it	became.	How	did	the
Suta	succeed	in	whatever	he	did?
***
Bhanumati	waited	in	her	chamber	for	her	husband	to	come.	She	yearned	for	his
touch,	his	comforting	embrace,	his	smell,	and	for	the	serenity	she	had	always
felt	 when	 he	 held	 her	 close.	 Those	 were	 fading	 memories	 now,	 yet	 she
cherished	them.	She	had	been	hurt	and	angry	when	he	had	not	even	taken	leave
of	 her	 before	 departing	 for	 Gandhara,	 but	 anxiety	 had	 soon	 pushed	 back	 her
anger.	She	had	feared	for	his	life.	Whenever	she	heard	the	galloping	of	a	horse
on	 the	 Royal	 Highway,	 cold	 hands	 clutched	 at	 her	 heart.	 Praise	 be	 he	 had
returned	without	injury.
Bhanumati	 rushed	 to	 the	 balcony,	 hoping	 to	 catch	 Suyodhana’s	 eye.	 She	 saw

him	riding	in	on	a	magnificent	horse.	He	looked	so	happy	in	his	own	world	–
laughing,	 waving,	 throwing	 coins	 to	 the	 crowd	 and	 basking	 in	 the	 glory	 of
victory.	He	did	not	look	up.	A	smile	would	have	been	enough,	even	a	tilt	of	the
head,	but	it	seemed	that	in	Suyodhana’s	world,	no	one	existed	except	Karna	and
himself.	Bhanumati	gripped	the	railings	of	the	balcony	as	her	children	jumped
up	 and	down	in	excitement	 at	 seeing	their	 father.	 ‘Suyodhana,	 at	 least	look	at
your	children	and	give	them	a	smile,’	she	begged	in	her	heart.
As	 if	 in	 answer	 to	 her	 prayers,	 a	 man	 in	 the	 Prince’s	 entourage	 waved	 to	 the
children,	 his	 teeth	 a	 brilliant	 white	 against	 his	 dark	 face.	 It	 was	 Ekalavya,	 the
Nishada	whom	her	unpredictable	husband	had	made	a	King.	He	was	waving	at
her	and	the	children.	The	audacity	of	the	Nishada	was	galling.	Who	else	would
her	 husband	 befriend?	 Did	 he	 not	 care	 about	 the	 tongues	 wagging	 about	 his
actions?	 She	 dragged	 the	 protesting	 children	 inside	 and	 closed	 the	 balcony
door.	She	wanted	to	be	alone.
Bhanumati	did	not	know	when	she	finally	dozed	off.	She	woke	with	a	start	and
stretched	 out	 her	 hand,	 hoping	 to	 feel	 him	 near	 her.	 Already	 it	 was	 morning
and	she	could	hear	the	servants	moving	about	outside.	Why	had	he	not	come?
Lakshmana	 stirred	 in	 her	 sleep	 and	 Bhanumati	 pulled	 up	 the	 coverlet	 her
daughter	had	thrown	off.
Had	 someone	 coughed	 outside?	 Bhanumati	 ran	 to	 open	 the	 door,	 her	 eyes
alight	 with	 joyful	 expectation.	 A	 dark	 face	 stared	 back	 at	 her.	 She	 wanted	 to
scream.	 How	 dared	 the	 Nishada	 come	 to	 pollute	 her	 space?	 How	 dared	 he
come	near	the	chambers	of	the	Crown	Prince?
But	Ekalavya	smiled	and	stepped	back.	Bhanumati	stood	beside	the	open	door,
uneasily	 aware	 of	 the	 man’s	 presence	 outside	 her	 bedchamber.	 She	 was	 still
searching	for	a	suitable	snub	when	Lakshmana	woke,	saw	Ekalavya,	and	came
running.	 The	 Nishada	 bowed	 low	 before	 the	 little	 Princess.	 To	 Bhanumati’s
horror,	 her	 little	 daughter	 shrieked	 with	 joy	 and	 jumped	 into	 the	 dark	 man’s
arms.	Hearing	the	commotion,	Lakshmana	Kumara	also	awoke	and	joined	in.
Soon	the	three	of	them	were	rolling	on	the	floor,	laughing.	Bhanumati	wanted
to	prise	them	apart,	call	the	guards	and	have	the	untouchable	whipped,	but	she
stood	frozen,	unable	to	move.	She	had	suddenly	seen	a	third	eye	burning	like	a
coal	in	the	centre	of	Ekalavya’s	forehead.	It	was	there	and	then	it	was	gone,	like
an	illusion.	Yet	she	was	certain	she	had	seen	it.	The	dark	man	was	running	with

her	 children	 to	 the	 garden.	 Had	 she	 witnessed	 something	 beyond	 her
understanding?	Who	was	the	Nishada,	really?
***
In	Drona’s	home,	Aswathama	sat	sulking.	His	father	had	not	spoken	a	word	to
him	since	his	return.	It	was	almost	as	if	Aswathama	did	not	exist.	Drona	sat	in
meditation	 in	 his	 puja	 room.	 Aswathama	 whirled	 the	 copper	 tumbler	 his
mother	had	placed	near	him	with	shaking	hands,	and	a	few	drops	of	water	from
it	splashed	onto	the	floor.
Aswathama	could	not	bear	his	father ’s	indifference	a	moment	longer.	“I	have
returned	from	Gandhara,”	he	said	loudly	and	waited.
“Ask	 him	 where	 he	 got	 the	 precious	 stone	 he	 is	 wearing	 on	 his	 headcloth,”
Drona	 said	 to	 Kripi.	 “Ask	 him	 why	 he	 has	 brought	 a	 stone	 of	 sin	 into	 this
Brahmin’s	home.”
Aswathama	glared	at	his	father.	“It	is	a	gift	from	my	friend.”
Not	looking	at	his	son,	Drona	said	to	his	wife,	“Kripi,	tell	your	son	that	it	is
loot	 from	 Gandhara.	 Tell	 him	 that	 a	 Brahmin	 should	 not	 soil	 his	 hands	 with
such	 possessions.	 Any	 possession	 is	 sin	 for	 a	 Brahmin.	 Tell	 him	 that	 any
attachment	will	lead	to	disaster	and	heartbreak.”
“Suyodhana	gifted	me	the	stone	for	my	services.”
After	what	seemed	like	an	eternity,	Drona	replied,	“Kripi,	did	you	know	that	it
needed	a	Suta’s	skill	to	save	your	son	in	Gandhara?	Now,	had	it	been	Arjuna...”
Aswathama	 knocked	 over	 the	 tumbler,	 spilling	 water	 everywhere.	 Even	 the
food	in	his	father ’s	house	seemed	noxious	and	poisonous	now.	Aswathama	was
about	to	kick	away	the	plantain	leaf	his	mother	had	placed	before	him	when	he
heard	her	call	to	him	softly.	He	paused,	expecting	her	to	speak	in	his	support.
“Food	is	Goddess	Annapurna,	son.	We	have	starved	enough	in	our	life.	Do	not
disrespect	the	Goddess,”	Kripi	said	in	a	low	voice.
Aswathama	could	not	believe	his	ears.	Was	that	all	his	mother	had	to	say?	He

rolled	 up	 the	 plantain	 leaf,	 careful	 not	 to	 spill	 the	 food,	 and	 walked	 out,
heading	towards	the	river.	At	the	riverbank	he	saw	the	beggar	Jara	sitting	under
a	tree,	humming	to	himself.	Aswathama	placed	the	leaf	full	of	food	before	him.
The	beggar ’s	face	lit	up.	A	pang	of	guilt	stabbed	the	Brahmin.
“Krishna,	you	have	come	with	food.”
“Krishna!	Don’t	you	have	eyes,	man?	I	am	Aswathama,	not	the	cowherd.”
“Everyone	 is	 Krishna,	 everything	 is	 Krishna,”	 the	 beggar	 said	 serenely,	 first
feeding	his	dog.
Aswathama	felt	irritation	stir	in	his	troubled	mind.	“Jara,	you	keep	singing	and
praying.	 But	 have	 you	 done	 even	 a	 single	 day’s	 hard	 labour?	 Why	 shame
yourself	 by	 begging	 from	 others?	 Why	 not	 work	 and	 live	 on	 your	 own
earnings?	Does	not	your	Krishna	say	that	work	is	the	greatest	worship?”
“My	life	is	an	act	of	devotion	to	my	Lord.	I	sing	because	my	soul	overflows
with	his	praise.	I	take	only	what	is	required	to	sustain	me,	until	my	Lord	gives
me	merciful	moksha.	I	do	not	save	for	tomorrow,	I	do	not	have	a	house	to	live
in,	a	yard	to	tend	to,	a	wife	to	clothe	or	a	child	to	feed.	My	dog	and	I	eat	once	a
day.	 I	 have	 clothing	 to	 cover	 my	 nakedness.	 I	 lack	 nothing.	 I	 do	 not	 beg	 for
myself,	 I	 beg	 so	 that	 men	 do	 not	 forget	 kindness	 and	 compassion.	 There	 are
different	 kinds	 of	 work.	 Work	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 result	 is	 not	 worship.	 Work
unaffected	by	result	is	true	worship.”
Aswathama	 watched	 the	 beggar	 with	 distaste.	 ‘Crazy’	 was	 the	 first	 word	 that
came	to	his	mind.	Suddenly	an	image	came	to	his	mind,	and	he	shook	his	head
to	erase	it.	He	was	hallucinating,	he	needed	to	sleep.	But	he	did	not	want	to	go
home	 to	 where	 his	 father	 lived.	 The	 image	 flashed	 again	 –	 the	 beggar	 was
feeding	him,	Aswathama,	the	dog	by	his	side.	Aswathama	trembled.	Before	the
image	could	reappear,	he	jumped	into	the	river.	Jealousy	of	Karna	and	a	sense
of	inferiority	assaulted	the	son	of	Drona.	He	had	gone	to	Gandhara	with	high
expectations	 and	 failed.	 The	 few	 words	 of	 affection	 his	 father	 had	 spoken
before	he	left	were	now	a	distant	memory.	‘Oh	God,	why	are	you	so	cruel	to
me?’	 the	 Brahmin	 asked	 in	 anguish.	 He	 took	 some	 water	 in	 his	 palms	 and
prayed,	“Ma	Ganga,	wash	away	my	sins...	“

Aswathama	struggled	to	shrug	off	his	petty	thoughts	about	Karna.	Were	they	all
just	 puppets	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 an	 all-knowing	 God?	 Was	 life	 but	 a	 farce	 to
entertain	a	cruel	God?	The	beggar ’s	song	caressed	his	bruised	soul	but	did	not
soothe	his	mind.	The	precious	stone	glistened	on	his	headcloth.	Jealousy	rose
again	like	bile	from	his	stomach	and	Aswathama	dunked	his	head	into	the	cold
waters	 of	 the	 Ganga	 and	 prayed,	 ‘Karna,	 my	 friend,	 may	 you	 always	 be
victorious!	Bless	my	friend	with	glory	every	time,	Ma	Ganga!’
But	even	the	holy	waters	of	the	Ganga	could	not	quench	the	burning	jealousy
inside	him.
***

22		RETURN	OF	THE	MLECHA
	
TWELVE	 LONG	 YEARS	 HAD	 GONE	 BY.	

It	 had	 been	 a	 difficult	 task	 to	 win	 back
Suyodhana’s	 confidence.	 Shakuni	 did	 not	 visit	 Hastinapura	 for	 eight	 years
following	Aswathama’s	attack	on	Gandhara.	Instead,	he	used	the	time	to	bring
prosperity	 back	 to	 his	 people.	 His	 popularity	 stood	 at	 an	 all-time	 high	 in	 the
country.	 His	 people	 adored	 him	 for	 his	 fairness	 and	 sense	 of	 justice.	 He	 had
grown	 old	 with	 grace,	 his	 flowing	 beard	 now	 almost	 white.	 His	 sons	 had
grown	up.	Life	had	been	good	to	the	Gandharan.
Shakuni	could	afford	to	turn	back	to	the	affairs	of	his	most	hated	enemy.	Once
he	had	crossed	the	Indus,	he	became	a	different	man.	The	last	four	years	had
been	 a	 relentless	 struggle	 to	 retrieve	 his	 position	 in	 Hastinapura	 politics.	 By
abasing	 himself,	 pampering	 to	 the	 egos	 of	 pretentious	 men,	 and	 by	 using
charm,	bribes	and	intrigue,	Shakuni	had	worked	his	way	back	into	the	palace.
The	Pandavas’	term	of	exile	was	nearing	its	end.	In	another	four	months	they
would	have	to	go	incognito	for	a	year.	That	would	be	the	time	to	strike.
Shakuni’s	brain	was	in	a	whirl,	planning	and	plotting.	Yuyutsu’s	tightening	grip
over	the	economy	and	the	festering	resentment	against	the	merchant	was	a	fault
line	 he	 could	 use	 to	 instigate	 a	 bloody	 civil	 war.	 The	 current	 drought	 was
helping,	too.	But	 Indians	were	so	passive,	they	preferred	to	die	on	the	streets
starving	rather	than	rise	up	against	their	rulers.
Takshaka	 had	 become	 almost	 useless.	 The	 fool	 had	 moved	 south	 of	 the
Vindhyas	and	founded	a	city	for	the	Nagas,	which	he	named	Nagapura.	All	he
did	was	harass	Brahmins	and	non-Nagas.	But	the	backlash	against	him	was	not
quick	 enough	 in	 coming.	 He	 had	 managed	 to	 get	 a	 few	 followers.	 Nagapura
was	located	in	the	centre	of	India	but	it	was	nothing	more	than	an	overgrown
village	 for	 the	 dispossessed.	 The	 majority	 of	 Nagas	 preferred	 to	 follow
Ekalavya	rather	than	Takshaka.	The	forest	people	were	either	content	or	afraid
of	their	King.

Shakuni	 knew	 he	 had	 to	 split	 the	 unity	 of	 the	 Nagas.	 Every	 caste	 and
community	had	to	be	made	to	fight	each	other.	Sitting	in	distant	Gandhara,	he
had	only	been	able	to	engineer	some	minor	riots.	Nothing	seemed	to	work	and
India	 seemed	 blessed	 with	 infernal	 luck.	 But	 his	 time	 was	 coming.	 Shakuni
flung	 his	 dice	 onto	 the	 table.	 They	 clattered,	 spun	 and	 rolled	 under	 his	 chair.
Cursing,	 he	 bent	 to	 retrieve	 them.	 All	 of	 a	 sudden,	 he	 remembered	 Durjaya.
Shakuni	 wished	 the	 crime	 lord	 was	 a	 free	 man.	 Though	 he	 had	 befriended
other	criminals,	none	had	displayed	the	ingenuity	and	ruthlessness	of	Durjaya.
It	 was	 fortunate	 that	 Suyodhana	 had	 not	 killed	 the	 thug.	 Had	 he	 gone	 mad	 in
prison	 or	 fallen	 into	 despondency?	 There	 was	 no	 way	 of	 knowing	 without
visiting	him	in	the	dungeon	where	he	was	held	under	tight	security.	It	was	too
risky.
What	would	make	the	Kuru	cousins	fight	each	other?	If	the	shameless	Pandavas
refused	 to	 fight	 even	 for	 the	 honour	 of	 their	 common	 wife,	 what	 would	 they
battle	for?	Perhaps	he	could	involve	Krishna	in	some	way,	then	things	would
change.	But	instigating	Krishna	to	do	something	rash	was	not	going	to	be	easy.
The	 Yadava	 Prince	 was	 the	 only	 one	 Shakuni	 considered	 a	 worthy	 rival	 in
terms	of	astuteness	and	acumen.	But	even	great	men	had	some	weakness.	What
was	Krishna’s?	The	man	could	charm	a	tiger	to	shed	its	teeth,	he	could	slay	an
army.	No,	he	would	have	to	pull	the	rug	from	under	Krishna’s	feet	without	him
knowing	 it.	 He	 would	 need	 to	 deepen	 the	 animosity	 between	 Krishna	 and
Suyodhana	by	making	them	both	think	they	were	fighting	for	a	greater	cause.
The	bloodiest	wars	were	when	both	sides	thought	they	were	the	righteous	ones.
He	had	to	create	a	war	where	individual	definitions	of	dharma	clashed	in	selfrighteous	rage	and	destroyed	each	other.
No	plan	came	to	Shakuni’s	mind,	but	after	an	hour	in	a	trance,	peace	descended
on	him	like	a	gentle	balm.	He	would	have	to	persuade	Suyodhana	to	visit	the
South.	Once	the	Crown	Prince	was	removed	from	Hastinapura	and	Jayadratha
made	 Regent,	 he	 could	 work	 out	 something.	 Perhaps	 Suyodhana	 would	 do
something	 rash	 on	 his	 visit	 to	 the	 conservative	 South.	 But	 the	 key	 lay	 in	 the
rivalry	between	Krishna	and	Suyodhana.	With	shaking	hands,	Shakuni	fumbled
for	 his	 dice	 and	 tossed	 them	 to	 the	 floor,	 whispering,	 “Twelve”.	 They	 rolled
and	came	to	rest	at	a	perfect	twelve.
“Krishna!”	he	cried	with	a	crooked	smile.	No	devotee	of	the	charming	Yadava
could	have	uttered	the	name	with	more	passion.	Something	big	was	coming	his

way.
***
Ekalavya	 sat	 polishing	 his	 bow	 when	 Khatotkacha	 approached	 him,
accompanied	 by	 a	 slim	 boy	 in	 his	 late	 teens.	 Mildly	 irritated,	 the	 King	 of	 the
forest	lands	asked	Bhima’s	son,	“What	does	he	want?”
“Guru,	he	wants	to	learn	the	art	of	using	weapons.”
Ekalavya	continued	with	his	work.	He	could	sense	the	apprehension	of	the	two
teenagers.	He	had	come	to	like	the	hefty	Rakshasa,	Khatotkacha,	in	the	twelve
years	he	had	known	him.	He	could	still	remember	the	day	Hidumbi	had	come
to	him	after	he	had	taken	charge	of	the	forest	lands.	She	had	a	boy	of	five	or
six	 with	 her	 and	 she	 had	 wanted	 him	 to	 teach	 her	 son.	 Curious,	 he	 had	 asked
about	 the	 boy’s	 father.	 When	 he	 heard	 the	 boy	 was	 Bhima’s	 son,	 he	 had
declined	 to	 have	 anything	 to	 do	 with	 them.	 But	 the	 boy	 refused	 to	 give	 up.
Every	morning,	for	six	months,	the	first	thing	Ekalavya	saw	was	Khatotkacha’s
face.	 Finally,	 convinced	 that	 Khatotkacha’s	 thirst	 for	 knowledge	 rivalled	 his
own,	he	relented.	Twelve	years	later,	Ekalavya	did	not	have	any	regrets.
“Who	is	he?”	asked	Ekalavya	curtly.	Where	had	he	seen	that	face?
“Iravan,	 a	 Naga,”	 Khatotkacha	 replied	 shortly.	 Ekalavya’s	 gaze	 never	 left	 the
boy’s	face.
“Who	is	this	young	man,	Ekalavya?”	Vasuki’s	voice	broke	into	his	thoughts.
The	boy	turned	to	Vasuki,	bowed	and	said,	“I	am	Iravan.”
“That	 is	 your	 name.	 But	 who	 are	 your	 parents?	 Which	 clan	 or	 tribe	 do	 you
belong	 to?	 Where	 are	 you	 from?”	 Vasuki	 leaned	 on	 his	 staff,	 scrutinizing
Iravan’s	face.
“My	mother	is	Naga.	Her	name	is	Uloopi.”
“And	your	father?”
Iravan	did	not	reply.	His	eyes	fell	and	he	stared	at	his	feet.

Ekalavya	took	Iravan	shoulders	in	a	grip	of	iron	and	said	coldly,	“Tell	me!”
“My	father	is	the	Pandava,	Arjuna.”	Iravan’s	voice	was	almost	a	whisper,	as	if
uttering	his	father ’s	name	was	a	shameful	thing.
Ekalavya	 let	 go	 of	 the	 boy.	 The	 odd	 familiarity	 now	 made	 sense.	 “How	 dare
you	come	to	me	seeking	knowledge?	Is	it	my	duty	to	teach	all	the	bastard	sons
the	 Pandavas	 leave	 behind	 in	 every	 village	 on	 their	 trail?	 First	 Khatotkacha,
and	 now	 you!	 Do	 you	 know	 what	 your	 father	 did?”	 Ekalavya	 shoved	 his
thumbless	hand	in	Iravan’s	face.
“I	have	no	one	else.”	Iravan’s	eyes	flashed.	He	refused	to	look	at	the	missing
thumb	on	Ekalavya’s	hand	and	raised	his	chin	defiantly.	“I	thought	you	would
be	 a	 person	 to	 whom	 skill,	 knowledge	 and	 ability	 have	 no	 barriers.	 I	 was
wrong.	I	will	go.”	He	bowed	and	began	to	walk	away.
The	 boy’s	 words	 were	 like	 a	 slap	 on	 Ekalavya’s	 face.	 Something	 in	 Iravan
reminded	him	of	himself	–	the	same	thirst	for	knowledge,	the	same	willpower
to	 learn	 and	 succeed.	 “Son!”	 Ekalavya’s	 voice	 was	 hoarse,	 his	 throat	 dry,	 as
Iravan	 stopped.	 Looking	 into	 the	 distance,	 the	 Nishada	 King	 said,	 “Show	 me
what	you	know.”
The	boy	lifted	the	crude	bow	he	was	carrying	and	took	aim.	Vasuki	stood	near
Ekalavya,	leaning	on	his	stick.	The	arrow	whizzed	past	them	both,	finding	the
narrow	gap	between	their	heads	and	pierced	a	tree	behind	them.	The	two	stood
frozen	 as	 Iravan	 pulled	 another	 arrow	 from	 his	 quiver	 and	 took	 aim.	 The
second	 arrow	 traced	 the	 same	 path	 and	 bisected	 the	 first	 with	 unnerving
accuracy.
“Shabash!”	Vasuki	cried	and	limped	over	to	Iravan	as	fast	as	his	old	legs	could
carry	him.
Ekalavya	stood	stunned	by	what	he	had	seen.	What	could	he	possibly	teach	this
boy?	The	ugly	snake	of	jealousy	raised	its	head.	Did	Iravan	being	Arjuna’s	son
have	something	to	do	with	his	unbelievable	talent?
“Accept	me	as	your	disciple,	Guru.	Make	me	a	worthy	warrior	like	my	cousin,
Khatotkacha.”

Before	 he	 could	 say	 anything,	 Iravan	 bent	 and	 touched	 Ekalavya’s	 feet.	 His
ghost	 thumb	 itched	 as	 memories	 of	 a	 boy	 falling	 at	 the	 feet	 of	 a	 great	 Guru
came	 flooding	 back	 to	 his	 mind.	 Was	 fate	 mocking	 him	 by	 reversing	 roles?
‘Oh,	 Shiva,	 give	 me	 the	 courage	 to	 forget	 and	 forgive,’	 he	 prayed.	 Ekalavya
lifted	 Arjuna’s	 son.	 What	 could	 be	 more	 fitting	 revenge	 than	 making	 the
bastard	sons	of	blue-blooded	Kshatriyas	better	warriors	than	them?	What	more
could	a	Nishada	ask	for	as	retribution?
Vasuki	tapped	his	stick	on	the	ground.	“All	this	is	fine,	but	beware!	Keep	away
from	 the	 affairs	 of	 the	 Kauravas	 and	 Pandavas.”	 Like	 most	 of	 Vasuki’s	 wise
words,	these	too	were	ignored,	eventually	extracting	a	heavy	price	for	having
gone	unheeded.
Who	 knew	 what	 the	 future	 held,	 thought	 Ekalavya.	 What	 mattered	 was	 the
profound	peace	he	felt	at	this	moment.	He	almost	felt	like	God,	like	Shiva.
Meanwhile,	in	another	part	of	the	forest,	a	hunting	party	arrived.	The	actions	of
one	of	them	would	trigger	a	set	of	catastrophic	events.
*****

23			THE	POET
	
“WHY	DOES	OUR	SON	BEHAVE	IN	THIS	WAY,	BHANU?”

Bhanumati	 clenched	 her	 fists,	 her	 lips	 closed	 in	 a	 thin	 line.	 She	 knew
Suyodhana	was	tense	and	worried,	but	that	was	no	excuse	to	behave	in	this	way
towards	their	son.	The	treasury	was	almost	empty	and	the	rains	had	failed	for
the	second	year.	Everywhere	there	was	drought	and	famine,	yet	all	her	husband
fretted	 over	 was	 the	 return	 of	 the	 Pandavas	 to	 Hastinapura.	 The	 Pandavas’
twelve-year	exile	was	nearing	its	end	and	they	would	soon	go	incognito.
“Speak	up,	fool!”	Suyodhana	raised	his	voice	to	his	son.
Abhimanyu,	standing	beside	Lakshmana	Kumara,	suppressed	a	grin.	His	cousin
was	 in	 trouble	 yet	 again.	 Bhanumati	 had	 tried	 to	 stop	 her	 son	 from	 being
friends	 with	 Subhadra	 and	 Arjuna’s	 gifted	 son,	 but	 to	 no	 avail.	 Kumara	 was
devoted	 to	 his	 cousin.	 Each	 time	 Abhimanyu	 visited	 Hastinapura	 to	 pay	 his
respects	to	Lord	Bhishma	and	Guru	Drona,	he	made	it	a	point	to	visit	them	too.
He	 had	 charmed	 Suyodhana	 with	 his	 winning	 ways	 and	 skills	 as	 a	 warrior.	 It
did	not	help	that	Subhadra	often	accompanied	her	son.	Bhanu	saw	the	look	in
Suyodhana’s	eyes	when	he	looked	at	Subhadra.	No,	she	was	not	jealous,	but	no
husband	should	look	at	another	woman	that	way.	She	was	not	envious,	Bhanu
told	herself,	but	the	son,	he	was	so	cocky!
“Have	you	swallowed	a	stick?”	Suyodhana	asked,	slapping	his	thigh.	“Why	are
you	slipping	in	weaponry	practice?	The	Acharya	says	you	are	fit	only	to	be	a
clerk.	 You	 are	 a	 Kshatriya,	 Kumara,	 grow	 up!	 What	 have	 you	 to	 say	 for
yourself?”
Abhimanyu	intervened	with	barely	concealed	glee.	“Uncle,	my	cousin	does	not
wish	to	be	a	warrior.”
“He	is	never	going	to	be	one.	Look	at	his	limbs.	Is	he	a	boy	or	a	girl?”

Bhanumati	recoiled	at	Suyodhana’s	harsh	words.	Kumara’s	soft	brown	eyes,	so
like	his	sister ’s,	filled	with	tears.	How	nice	it	would	be	to	wipe	that	smug	smile
off	 Abhimanyu’s	 face,	 Bhanumati	 thought.	 The	 young	 warrior	 stood	 ramrod
straight,	running	a	thumb	over	the	sharp	edge	of	his	sword.
“What	do	you	want	in	life,	son?”	Suyodhana	finally	asked.	Bhanumati	wanted
to	grab	her	son’s	hand	and	run	from	the	room.	She	knew	what	was	coming.
“Would	you	like	me	to	tell	my	uncle,	Kumara?”	Abhimanyu	asked	solicitously,
a	mischievous	smile	on	his	fine	lips.	Kumara’s	eyes	pleaded	with	his	friend	to
remain	silent.	“Uncle,	my	cousin	wishes	to	be	a	poet,”	Abhimanyu	said,	unable
to	hide	the	laughter	in	his	voice.
There	 was	 an	 uneasy	 silence.	 Kumara	 eyed	 his	 father	 fearfully.	 Bhanumati
wanted	to	rush	to	her	son	and	hide	him	in	a	protective	embrace.	But	it	would
have	embarrassed	him,	he	was	almost	fifteen	and	she	could	see	the	shadow	of	a
moustache	above	his	upper	lip.	How	quickly	children	grew	up!
“Perhaps	it	is	best	you	go	to	someone	I	know.	He	changed	my	life;	maybe	he
can	 change	 yours,	 too,”	 Suyodhana	 said	 in	 a	 weary	 voice	 from	 which	 all
mockery	had	fled.
“He	is	not	going	anywhere.”	Bhanumati	stood	up.
“Would	 you	 prefer	 your	 son	 to	 be	 called	 a	 sissy	 all	 his	 life,	 Bhanu?	 He	 is	 a
Kshatriya;	he	has	to	rule	this	country	one	day.”
“He	would	be	fine	if	only	you	would	stop	badgering	him	like	this.”
“Enough!	When	I	need	your	advice,	I	will	ask	for	it.	This	is	between	father	and
son.	Stay	out	of	it,	Bhanu.”
“He	is	my	son,	too,	Suyodhana,”	Bhanumati	stated	adamantly.
“Why	 do	 you	 insist	 on	 arguing	 about	 this,	 Bhanu?	 He	 is	 a	 wimp,	 a	 loser.
People	 laugh	 behind	 our	 backs.	 Is	 that	 what	 you	 want?	 He	 should	 learn	 from
his	cousin.	Just	look	at	Abhimanyu.”
“Abhimanyu	 is	 the	 son	 of	 a	 great	 warrior	 –	 Arjuna.”	 The	 words	 were	 out

before	 she	 could	 bite	 them	 back.	 She	 had	 crossed	 the	 line.	 She	 waited	 for
Suyodhana	to	lash	out	at	her	with	furious	words,	and	was	more	pained	when	he
ignored	her	and	turned	to	his	son.
“You	will	go	to	Dwaraka.	I	will	write	to	Balarama	today.”
“My	brother	is	going	to	Dwaraka!”	Lakshmana	said,	excitement	lighting	up	her
lovely	 face.	 She	 had	 been	 sitting	 quietly	 behind	 her	 mother	 throughout	 this
exchange.
How	 Suyodhana’s	 stern	 expression	 relaxed	 whenever	 he	 looked	 at	 his
daughter,	thought	Bhanumati.	She	was	so	beautiful!	How	was	she	to	protect	her
daughter	 from	 the	 preying	 eyes	 of	 the	 world?	 Lakshmana	 was	 so	 impulsive
and	trusting.	Her	father	adored	her.	She	was	everything	her	brother	was	not.
“I	 will	 go	 with	 bhrata	 to	 Dwaraka,”	 Lakshmana	 said,	 eyeing	 her	 mother	 and
smiling	at	her	father.
“No,	 you	 will	 not.	 You	 are	 not	 a	 little	 girl	 any	 more,	 Lakshmana.	 You	 are
almost	 of	 marriageable	 age,	 and	 I	 cannot	 have	 you	 roaming	 all	 over	 the
country	unattended.”
“Ma,	do	you	think	I	cannot	take	care	of	myself?	What	age	were	you	when	you
were	married?	I	am	only	fifteen!”
“Times	are	changing,	Lakshmana.	In	my	time	it	was	acceptable	for	a	woman	to
choose	 to	 remain	 single	 until	 her	 late	 twenties.	 Now,	 parents	 marry	 off	 their
daughters	even	at	the	age	of	twelve.”
Lakshmana	knew	she	would	not	be	able	to	get	around	her	stern	mother	so	she
walked	up	to	her	father,	head	tilted	in	the	way	he	loved,	and	cajoled,	“Father,
please	let	me	go.	I	want	to	be	with	bhrata.”
Bhanumati	knew	she	had	lost.	Suyodhana	could	never	say	no	to	his	daughter.	In
a	last	ditch	attempt,	she	said,	“The	roads	are	infested	with	bandits.”	She	did	not
know	why	but	she	felt	extremely	uneasy	about	the	whole	proposition.
“Bhanu,	do	you	think	someone	would	dare	harm	a	Princess	of	Hastinapura?”
Father	and	daughter	laughed	aloud.	The	very	idea	was	ridiculous.

Bhanumati	 could	 stand	 it	 no	 more.	 “Do	 what	 you	 want.	 Has	 any	 of	 you	 ever
listened	to	me?	Do	I	even	exist?”	She	stared	out	of	the	window	in	frustration,
feeling	helpless	and	unhappy	that	her	husband	no	longer	came	to	her	when	he
needed	solace,	upset	that	he	never	talked	to	her	about	his	dreams.	Did	he	have
any	dreams	left,	other	than	to	cling	to	the	throne?	Kumara	came	up	and	put	his
arms	around	her	gently,	trying	to	comfort	her.	She	could	feel	his	emotion.
“Are	 you	 a	 five-year-old	 to	 hold	 your	 mother	 and	 weep?”	 asked	 Suyodhana,
disgusted.
Abhimanyu	choked	back	a	laugh.	His	cousin	was	so	entertaining.
“Does	your	cousin’s	distress	amuse	you,	Prince?”	asked	Bhanumati.
Abhimanyu	 looked	 away,	 embarrassed.	 He	 turned	 and	 quickly	 walked	 out	 of
the	room.
Kumara	looked	up	at	his	father,	his	face	expressionless,	but	he	did	not	remove
his	comforting	arm	from	around	his	mother ’s	shoulders.
“Ma,	Abhimanyu	is	the	only	friend	Kumara	has.	He	is	more	like	a	brother	to
him	than	a	cousin,”	Lakshmana	said.
“Abhimanyu	 cannot	 be	 trusted,”	 Bhanumati	 replied	 with	 quiet	 certainty.	 She
waited	for	her	son	to	say	something	but	Kumara	stood	in	silence.
But	 Lakshmana	 had	 never	 taken	 anything	 in	 silence.	 “Ma,	 everyone	 loves
Abhimanyu.	How	can	you	say	such	things	about	him?”
“It	 does	 not	 matter	 what	 others	 say.	 I	 know	 he	 cannot	 be	 trusted,”	 Bhanumati
replied,	looking	straight	into	Suyodhana’s	eyes,	daring	him	to	contradict	her.
“You	hate	Abhimanyu	because	you	are	jealous	of	Aunt	Subhadra...”	Lakshmana
began,	but	her	petulant	words	died	at	the	stricken	look	on	her	mother ’s	face.
How	it	hurt	when	her	daughter	said	things	she	thought	she	had	hidden	from	the
world,	 Bhanumati	 thought	 as	 she	 turned	 away	 from	 her	 son,	 daughter	 and
husband.

A	 corpulent	 man	 entered	 the	 room	 without	 being	 announced.	 His	 eyes	 had
vanished	into	his	puffy	face,	but	the	grin	could	not	have	been	wider.	Bhanumati
hastily	drew	her	pallu	over	her	head.
“Arrange	 for	 the	 Prince	 and	 Princess	 to	 travel	 to	 Dwaraka,	 Yuyutsu,”
Suyodhana	said	and	turned	his	back	on	the	newcomer.
“So	my	little	Princess	is	going	to	Dwaraka?	I	will	arrange	the	best	chariots	for
you.	Will	two	hundred	servants	be	enough	to	make	you	comfortable?”	Yuyutsu
asked,	bowing.
“Hastinapura	 has	 enough	 chariots	 of	 its	 own.	 Why	 should	 my	 father	 need	 to
borrow	a	chariot	from	a	merchant?”	Lakshmana	asked	imperiously.
“We	are	family,	Princess.	What	is	mine	is	your	father ’s	to	command	and	what
is	his	is...	shared	by	the	family,”	Yuyutsu	said,	beaming.	“Why	be	angry	with	a
poor	 merchant,	 my	 Princess?	 I	 am	 your	 uncle.	 Hastinapura	 owes	 me	 a	 lot	 of
money	but	I	care	only	about	its	progress.	Though	I	am	the	eldest,	I	am	satisfied
with	some	small	profit,	as	is	a	Vysya’s	dharma.	Your	father	knows	this.”
Bhanumati	 looked	 at	 Suyodhana	 but	 her	 husband’s	 face	 wore	 only	 a	 look	 of
weariness.	Where	had	his	anger	vanished	to?	The	merchant	smiled	and	walked
out.
Suyodhana	 sighed	 and	 turned	 to	 his	 son.	 “Plan	 your	 trip	 to	 Dwaraka	 with
Abhimanyu.	 I	 will	 write	 to	 Balarama.	 Come	 back	 a	 man,	 a	 warrior,	 not	 a
whining	dreamer.	Take	your	sister	with	you.	I	am	going	to	the	South	and	I	want
to	see	you	a	man	by	the	time	I	return.”
“Oh	thank	you,	Father!”	Lakshmana	rushed	to	hug	Suyodhana.	His	 tense	face
relaxed	as	he	patted	her	hair.
Before	Bhanumati	could	protest,	Suyodhana	walked	out	of	the	room.	His	harsh
words	 hurt	 her	 but	 his	 indifference	 pierced	 her	 heart.	 She	 looked	 at	 her
daughter,	so	full	of	life,	so	full	of	joy.	Some	deep	maternal	instinct	told	her	that
something	 terrible	 was	 going	 to	 happen	 to	 her	 daughter.	 If	 only	 she	 had	 the
power	to	stop	her	precious	one	from	going	to	Dwaraka.
*****

24 			DIFFERENT	GODS
	
KARNA	 WENT	 TO	 VISIT	 GURU	 PARASHURAMA	

when	 they	 reached	 Muzaris	 but
Suyodhana	 refused	 to	 see	 the	 Guru.	 Parashurama	 warned	 Karna	 of	 the	 dire
consequences	of	breaching	his	trust	and	Suyodhana	interfering	with	the	beliefs
of	the	Confederate	kingdoms.
One	 hot	 and	 humid	 morning,	 what	 Karna	 feared	 most	 happened.	 Despite	 his
best	efforts,	Suyodhana	insisted	they	travel	into	the	countryside.	They	galloped
south,	leaving	the	imperial	army	on	the	banks	of	the	dry	Poorna	River.	What	he
saw	turned	Suyodhana’s	mood	black.
“How	 have	 you	 allowed	 such	 atrocities,	 Karna?	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 such	 a
madhouse	in	my	life.	Forget	human	beings,	they	have	even	graded	animals	and
trees	as	touchable	and	untouchable!”
What	explanation	could	he	possibly	give	to	his	Guru	if	Suyodhana	acted	on	his
own	principles,	wondered	Karna	anxiously.	“I	gave	my	word	to	my	Guru	that	I
would	not	interfere	in	their	affairs,”	he	said,	but	the	excuse	sounded	lame	even
to	his	own	ears.
“What	do	you	need	with	such	a	Guru?”	Suyodhana	struck	his	thighs	in	anger.
Karna’s	 gaze	 met	 Aswathama’s	 eyes	 and	 he	 read	 the	 accusation	 in	 them,	 too.
Karna’s	anger	rose.	Was	it	his	fault	that	the	people	of	the	Confederate	followed
rigid	caste	rules?	Was	he	himself	not	a	victim	of	that	prejudice?	What	was	he
supposed	 to	 do?	 Murder	 anyone	 who	 talked	 about	 caste?	 Perhaps	 he	 should
have	 started	 that	 in	 Hastinapura,	 when	 he	 was	 publicly	 humiliated	 and
ostracised.	He	pressed	his	lips	together	in	hurt	silence.	The	last	thing	he	wanted
to	do	was	to	argue	with	his	friends.	He	wanted	to	be	back	with	his	family,	to	see
his	wife	and	sons.	This	place	sickened	him,	he	felt	choked	by	the	guilt	of	what
he	should	have	done.

By	noon	of	the	third	day	of	their	journey	south,	when	the	sun	was	a	white	blaze
over	 their	 heads	 and	 they	 were	 drenched	 in	 sweat,	 they	 finally	 reached	 a
decrepit-looking	 village.	 Hungry	 and	 thirsty,	 they	 seemed	 to	 have	 lost	 their
way.	 Every	 village	 looked	 alike,	 with	 dried	 up	 ponds	 and	 dusty	 trees.	 The
drought	had	sapped	the	life	of	this	once	evergreen	land.	The	thatched	roof	huts
looked	as	though	they	might	fall	down	at	any	moment.	Urchins	playing	in	the
mud	 paused	 to	 look	 wide-eyed	 at	 the	 strange	 men	 riding	 through	 their	 dirt
lanes.	Some	women	ran	to	collect	the	children	and	herd	them	into	the	huts.	The
men	sitting	in	their	mud	verandas	stood	up	in	alarm	and	gaped	at	the	warriors.
“Can	 we	 get	 some	 water?”	 Suyodhana	 asked	 a	 scrawny	 man,	 but	 received	 no
response.	 He	 gestured	 with	 his	 hands	 for	 water	 and	 the	 men	 stepped	 back	 in
horror,	as	if	he	had	spoken	unutterable	words.	“We	just	want	some	water.	Can
you	not	offer	water	to	thirsty	travellers?	We	have	lost	our	way	and...”
There	was	a	murmuring	among	the	men.	Karna	knew	why	the	villagers	were
so	afraid.	He	also	knew	his	friend	would	wish	no	harm	to	fall	on	the	hapless
villagers,	 but	 before	 he	 could	 warn	 Suyodhana,	 an	 old	 woman	 offered	 the
Crown	 Prince	 a	 mud	 pot.	 He	 took	 it	 gratefully	 and	 drank	 the	 contents	 like	 a
dying	man	given	a	reprieve.	The	murmuring	among	the	crowd	grew	louder.
“Swami,	punish	me,”	the	woman	said	with	trembling	lips.	A	little	girl	came	to
stand	near	her,	looking	at	them	with	round	eyes.
“Punish?	Mother,	why	should	I	punish	you?”	Suyodhana	asked	as	he	passed	the
pot	to	Aswathama.
The	 Brahmin	 took	 one	 look	 at	 the	 contents	 and	 squirmed	 in	 distaste.	 Karna
could	 feel	 his	 heart	 beating	 under	 the	 armour	 he	 wore.	 He	 knew	 why	 the
woman	was	afraid,	she	had	given	Suyodhana	toddy	–	the	drink	of	outcasts	and
untouchables.	 By	 drinking	 from	 the	 hands	 of	 an	 untouchable	 tribal,	 the
Kshatriya	had	lost	caste.	Suyodhana	could	regain	his	Kshatriya	status	only	by
killing	her	and	doing	sufficient	penance.	God	knows	how	many	gifts	he	would
have	 to	 give	 the	 Brahmins	 and	 how	 many	 ritual	 sacrifices	 he	 would	 have	 to
make	to	annul	this	sin.
“I	am	an	untouchable,	Swami.	By	taking	toddy	from	me,	you	too	have	become
one.	Kill	me	if	you	want,	but	please	spare	the	village.	We	have	little...”	The	old

woman’s	voice	trailed	off	as	she	held	the	little	girl	close.
Suyodhana	 looked	 at	 her,	 trying	 hard	 to	 comprehend	 what	 she	 was	 saying.
When	 Karna	 explained,	 Suyodhana	 jumped	 down	 from	 his	 saddle	 and	 gently
took	 the	 woman’s	 shrivelled	 hands	 in	 his	 own.	 He	 looked	 into	 her	 eyes	 and
said,	 “Mother,	 why	 should	 I	 punish	 you?	 You	 placed	 the	 thirst	 of	 a	 weary
traveller	over	your	own	life.	Bless	me	like	you	would	bless	your	son.”
The	woman	did	not	understand	the	words,	but	it	did	not	matter.	She	put	her	dark
hands	 over	 Suyodhana’s	 greying	 mane	 while	 the	 crowd	 looked	 on,	 shocked.
“Who	are	you,	my	son?	For	the	first	time	in	our	wretched	lives,	we	are	seeing
a	high-born	person	behave	like	this.”
“She	is	asking	who	you	are,”	Karna	said,	looking	away,	his	mind	a	tangle	of
conflicting	emotions.
“I	 am	 Suyodhana,	 notoriously	 known	 as	 Duryodhana,”	 the	 Crown	 Prince
replied.
An	 uneasy	 silence	 fell.	 A	 few	 women	 who	 had	 come	 out	 of	 their	 huts	 to	 see
what	 was	 happening,	 pulled	 their	 children	 back	 inside.	 The	 men,	 too,	 hurried
back	to	their	huts,	fear	writ	large	on	their	faces.
The	old	woman	looked	deep	into	Suyodhana’s	eyes.	She	turned	to	the	fleeing
villagers	and	raised	her	voice.	“They	told	us	lies.	This	Kshatriya	has	treated	us
as	human	beings.	For	us,	this	man	is	dharma.”
The	 villagers	 returned	 slowly	 to	 form	 a	 circle	 around	 Suyodhana	 and	 his
friends.	As	the	animated	discussion	and	arguments	grew	louder	around	them,
Suyodhana	asked	Karna	what	the	ruckus	was	all	about.
“They	 wish	 to	 build	 a	 temple	 in	 your	 honour,”	 Karna	 said	 unsteadily,	 “and
worship	you.”
“What?”	Suyodhana	laughed	aloud.	“Worship	me?	Are	they	mad?”
But	 Karna	 could	 see	 his	 friend	 was	 pleased.	 Suyodhana	 made	 a	 token	 protest
and	 said	 they	 should	 build	 a	 Shiva	 temple	 instead,	 but	 it	 was	 evident	 he	 was
relishing	the	thought	of	having	a	temple	dedicated	to	him.	Was	every	rebellious

act	by	him	an	unconscious	attempt	to	be	known	as	a	good	man?
Aswathama	offered	the	toddy	to	Karna,	his	eyes	shining	with	challenge.	As	he
lifted	 the	 pot	 to	 his	 mouth,	 Karna	 felt	 he	 would	 gag	 from	 the	 pungent	 smell.
His	entire	struggle	to	be	accepted	as	a	Kshatriya	would	come	to	naught	if	news
of	this	spread.	What	he	had	struggled	for	his	whole	life	would	mean	nothing	if
he	 lost	 his	 caste	 and	 became	 an	 untouchable.	 What	 a	 fall...	 even	 for	 a	 Suta!
Closing	 his	 eyes,	 he	 took	 a	 sip.	 The	 toddy	 tasted	 sweet	 in	 his	 mouth.	 As	 he
traced	its	scorching	trail	to	his	stomach,	the	sound	of	the	crowd	receded	into
the	 distance.	 By	 Guru	 Parashurama’s	 definition,	 Karna	 was	 no	 longer	 a
Kshatriya,	or	even	a	Suta.	He	had	lost	his	caste.	Strangely,	he	felt	free.	It	did	not
matter.	The	only	thing	that	counted	was	the	firmness	of	Suyodhana’s	hand	on
his	shoulder.
Around	him,	the	villagers	had	come	to	an	agreement.	A	temple	was	to	be	built.
A	cool	breeze	wafted	in	from	the	brackish	backwaters	and	Karna	relished	the
caress	of	the	setting	sun.	He	wished	Suyodhana’s	adventure	to	the	South	would
end	 and	 he	 would	 be	 spared	 further	 embarrassment.	 As	 if	 in	 answer	 to	 his
prayers,	 a	 messenger	 came	 rushing	 to	 meet	 the	 Crown	 Prince.	 They	 were
summoned	 back	 to	 Hastinapura	 immediately.	 A	 disastrous	 event	 had	 taken
place.
*****

25			THE	PROPOSAL
	
WHEN	 THE	 CROWN	 PRINCE	 KEPT	 HIS	 WORD	 and	 made	 Jayadratha	 Grand	 Regent

until	 he	 returned	 from	 the	 South,	 his	 brother-in-law	 had	 felt	 smug.	 He	 had
brought	 Sushala	 and	 his	 son,	 Suratha,	 with	 him	 to	 Hastinapura.	 The	 boy	 was
twelve	but	showed	no	talent	for	arms.	Sushala	yearned	to	see	her	son	become	a
great	 warrior	 but	 Jayadratha,	 with	 a	 father ’s	 insight,	 did	 not	 harbour	 much
hope	of	his	son	growing	to	be	a	warrior-ruler.	He	knew	that	unless	he	himself
did	 something	 to	 please	Suyodhana	and	 extract	a	larger	territory	to	rule	than
the	 small	 vassal	 state	 of	 Sindhudesa,	 his	 dynasty	 would	 remain	 insignificant
among	the	great	kingdoms	of	Bharatavarsha.
Jayadratha	had	been	born	after	many	years	of	prayer.	But	by	then	his	father	had
become	 too	 world	 weary	 to	 undertake	 adventures	 of	 expansion.	 By	 the	 time
Jayadratha	 attained	 manhood,	 the	 expanding	 Hastinapura	 empire	 had
swallowed	Sindhudesa	among	others	and	their	exalted	dynasty,	which	traced	its
lineage	 to	 Lord	 Vishnu	 himself,	had	become	rulers	of	an	insignificant	vassal
state	under	Bhishma.	Jayadratha	gained	some	importance	by	marrying	the	only
Princess	 of	 the	 Kuru	 dynasty,	 but	 the	 feeling	 of	 unworthiness	 never	 left	 him.
Sushala,	 with	 her	 constant	 comparison	 of	 the	 riches	 of	 her	 father	 to	 the
insignificance	of	Sindhudesa,	did	nothing	to	help	assuage	his	wounded	pride.
But	 if	 he	 made	 the	 right	 moves	 he	 might	 be	 able	 to	 persuade	 Suyodhana	 to
hand	over	to	him	the	neighbouring	vassal	kingdoms.	And	who	knew	what	the
future	held?	Perhaps	his	boy	would	have	grown	up	to	surprise	him.	If	the	war
between	 the	 cousins	 took	 place	 one	 day	 and	 the	 empire	 weakened,	 he	 could
perhaps	turn	things	around.	Hastinapura	as	a	vassal	state	of	Sindhudesa	was	a
refreshing	thought.
Despite	his	dreams	of	grandeur,	Jayadratha	was	not	a	popular	King	among	his
subjects.	 His	 father,	 now	 almost	 eighty	 years	 old,	 had	 carefully	 spread	 the
rumour	 of	 a	 boon	 he	 had	 received	 from	 Lord	 Shiva	 himself	 when	 he	 had
relinquished	the	throne	in	favour	of	his	son	–	If	anyone	killed	Jayadratha,	the

moment	his	head	touched	the	earth,	his	killer	would	die.	The	Sutas	of	Sindhu
added	spice	to	the	story	and	soon	the	superstitious	population	began	believing
that	 if	 Jayadratha	 was	 killed	 and	 his	 head	 hit	 the	 ground,	 his	 killer ’s	 head
would	explode	into	a	thousand	pieces.	It	was	one	of	the	things	that	prevented	a
coup	 in	 Sindhudesa.	 Jayadratha	 in	 his	 turn	 spread	 the	 story	 of	 a	 boon	 he	 had
obtained	–	that	no	Pandava	other	than	Arjuna	could	defeat	him.
It	had	been	three	days	since	he	had	taken	over	as	Grand	Regent	but	he	had	not
had	the	inclination	to	visit	Bhishma,	who	had	adorned	the	revered	position	for
so	many	years.	The	chamber	of	the	Grand	Regent	was	much	grander	than	his
own	 royal	 chambers	 in	 Sindh,	 thought	 Jayadratha	 bitterly	 as	 he	 viewed	 the
luxurious	appointments	of	the	room	–	the	twelve-foot-high	oil	lamp	made	of
silver,	 with	 the	 exquisite	 carving	 of	 a	 peacock,	 had	 glistening	 emeralds	 for
eyes;	the	visitors’	chairs	carved	in	ivory	made	his	throne	in	Sindhudesa	look
like	 a	 child’s	 playroom	 furniture;	 the	 curtains	 glistened	 with	 gold	 lace;	 the
carpet	 stretched	 in	 luxurious	 smoothness;	 the	 fragrance	 of	 exotic	 oils	 and
scents	that	permeated	the	air	–	it	all	made	him	mad	with	jealousy	and	anger.	No
wonder	Sushala	made	unfavourable	comparisons	about	Sindhudesa.
‘All	 this	 is	 looted	 wealth,’	 Jayadratha	 told	 himself.	 How	 he	 wished	 it	 all
belonged	to	him,	but	he	knew	he	was	no	match	for	Hastinapura.	However,	if	he
could	 please	 Suyodhana,	 he	 could	 get	 lucky.	 He	 had	 six	 months	 to	 prove
himself.	He	was	a	man	in	a	hurry.	He	tried	to	think	of	a	plan	that	would	call	on
Suyodhana’s	famed	generosity,	but	nothing	came	to	his	disturbed	mind.
A	 guard	 came	 in	 and	 bowed	 to	 the	 new	 Grand	 Regent.	 He	 said	 the	 Prince	 of
Gandhara	sought	permission	to	see	him.	Ah,	Shakuni!	Jayadratha’s	mind	leapt
with	pride.	Though	he	despised	the	Gandharan,	it	fed	his	ego	to	be	thus	waited
on	 by	 one	 who	 ruled	 a	 much	 vaster	 and	 richer	 territory	 than	 Sindhudesa.
Jayadratha	had	Shakuni	wait	until	the	palace	gong	sounded	the	passing	of	the
next	prahar	 before	 permitting	 him	 to	 enter.	 He	 did	 not	 speak	 for	 some	 time,
pretending	to	be	busy	reading	various	palm	leaves	and	barking	instructions,	as
Shakuni	 stood	 with	 head	 bowed	 in	 deep	 reverence.	 When	 he	 was	 satisfied	 he
had	shown	Shakuni	his	place,	Jayadratha	offered	him	a	seat.	Shakuni	declined,
saying	 that	 vassal	 Kings	 never	 sat	 before	 the	 Grand	 Regent	 of	 Hastinapura.
Pleased,	Jayadratha	persuaded	Shakuni	to	sit	down.
“Not	that	I	cherish	this	added	responsibility,	Shakuni,	but	I	have	my	hands	full

with	ruling	Sindh.	But	we	must	help	Suyodhana.”
“Oh,	I	know	it	is	a	great	burden	that	you	carry,	revered	Sindhu	Raja,	but	no	one
deserves	 to	 sit	 in	 this	 chair	 more	 than	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 like	 olden	 times	 when
vassal	 Kings	 had	 to	 beg	 and	 crawl	 before	 a	 mean	 old	 man.	 Now	 we	 have
someone	who	understands	our	problems.	The	Kings	of	Magadha,	Mithila	and
others,	were	expressing	relief	that	you	have	taken	over.	It	is	not	that	Suyodhana
is	not	generous,	but	the	post	of	Grand	Regent	has	remained	vacant	after	Lord
Bhishma	relinquished	it	and	you	know	my	nephew	is	always	partial	to	that	Suta.
Anga	gets	the	best	of	everything.”
“I	will	be	just	and	impartial	as	long	as	I	hold	the	post.”
“I	know	that	and	I	came	to	pay	my	respects.	By	the	way,	would	your	Excellency
care	to	have	me	report	to	you	on	the	movements	of	the	Pandavas,	if	it	will	not
burden	 your	 busy	 schedule?	 I	 was	 in	 charge	 of	 the	 espionage	 network	 of
Hastinapura	and...”
“Oh,	 certainly.	 What	 are	 they	 doing	 now?”	 Jayadratha	 sat	 forward,	 trying	 to
keep	his	eagerness	from	showing	on	his	face.
“In	 fact,	 they	 have	 gone	 in	 search	 of	 secret	 weapons	 and	 alliances,	 leaving
Draupadi	behind.	Only	Guru	Dhaumya	and	a	few	of	his	disciples	remain	with
her.”
“What	of	her	five	sons?”
“The	Pandavas	have	taken	the	boys	with	them.”
An	idea	started	forming	in	Jayadratha’s	head.	Draupadi	was	alone	in	the	forest.
He	had	attended	Draupadi’s	swayamvara,	but	had	not	even	had	the	chance	to	try
his	skill.	He	was	so	insignificant	a	King	that	the	Magadhan	who	had	announced
each	of	the	Kings	had	 hardly	said	 a	 word	 about	him.	Karna	had	been	in	love
with	 her.	 Jayadratha	 had	 joined	 Suyodhana	 and	 Aswathama	 in	 making	 fun	 of
Karna	and	his	feelings	for	Draupadi.	He	had	thought	the	Suta	would	win	her,
but	 she	 had	 insulted	 him	 instead	 and	 a	 fight	 had	 broken	 out.	 Finally	 she	 had
married	Arjuna,	and	then	his	four	brothers	as	well.	In	his	heart,	Jayadratha	had
always	lusted	over	Draupadi’s	beauty.	A	woman	who	married	five	men	could

not	 be	 said	 to	 be	 chaste.	 Her	 audacity	 in	 her	 laughing	 at	 Suyodhana	 and
insulting	 Karna	 made	 her	 even	 more	 appealing	 to	 Jayadratha.	 They	 had	 not
insulted	her	enough	in	the	Sabha	on	the	day	of	the	dice	game.
Shakuni	 read	 the	 thoughts	 flashing	 over	 Jayadratha’s	 face	 like	 an	 open	 book.
“Your	Majesty,	I	do	not	know	whether	I	am	crossing	a	line	by	saying	this,	but	a
great	 King	 like	 you	 should	 have	 married	 Draupadi,	 and	 not	 those	 poor	 and
broken	Pandavas.	Princess	Draupadi	deserved	better.”
Jayadratha	stared	at	Shakuni,	his	eyes	narrowed.	His	mind	was	in	turmoil.
“I	am	sure	she	would	be	willing	to	listen	to	your	offer.”
The	 burning	 in	 his	 loins	 found	 voice	 in	 his	 mind.	 What	 if	 he	 asked	 her	 to
satisfy	 him?	 If	 she	 resisted,	 he	 could	 take	 her	 somewhere,	 perhaps	 to	 Sindh,
and	keep	her	in	his	harem.	It	would	not	be	the	first	time	a	King	had	taken	the
woman	he	wanted,	nor	would	it	be	the	last.	Perhaps	she	would	even	agree	to	be
his	 wife,	 or	 he	 could	 bargain	 with	 the	 Pandavas	 for	 her	 release.	 He	 was	 sure
Suyodhana	 hated	 her	 and	 would	 support	 him	 in	 any	 scheme	 that	 shamed	 the
Pandavas.	Now	that	he	had	the	imperial	army	under	his	control,	the	Pandavas
would	 not	 dare	 question	 him.	 And	 if	 Suyodhana	 behaved	 irrationally,	 well,	 it
was	he	who	had	control	of	the	imperial	army.
“Can	 you	 take	 me	 to	 the	ashram?”	 Jayadratha	 said,	 his	 hands	 quivering	 with
nervous	tension.
“Allow	me	the	honour	of	making	the	arrangements,	Maharajan.”
The	foreigner	bowed	and	hurried	out.	Maharajan	–	it	pleased	Jayadratha	to	be
addressed	so.	He	ran	his	fingers	over	the	rounded	carvings	of	the	handrests	of
his	chair.	Draupadi...	at	last.
***
Shakuni	 hurried	 to	 his	 chamber.	 The	 man	 waiting	 outside	 bowed.	 The
Gandharan	 pulled	 out	 a	 small	 bag	 that	 jingled	 with	 coins	 and	 dropped	 it	 into
the	extended	hands	of	the	man.
“Hurry,”	 Shakuni	 said,	 “search	 for	 the	 Pandavas	 and	 tell	 them	 at	 the	 right

moment	what	Jayadratha	did	to	Draupadi.”
The	man	bowed	and	walked	out.	Shakuni	watched	him	walk	past	the	main	gate
of	the	palace	and	smiled.	He	had	rolled	the	dice	and	could	hardly	wait	for	the
result.
***
“Shall	I	wring	his	neck,	brother?”	Bhima	asked	Yudhishtra	as	he	tightened	his
grip	on	Jayadratha’s	neck.
Jayadratha’s	eyes	bulged	and	his	fingers	clawed	at	the	mud	in	which	he	lay	face
downward.	 Bhima	 towered	 over	 him,	 his	 knees	 pressing	 painfully	 into
Jayadratha’s	back.
Draupadi	laughed	scornfully.	“Oh,	not	so	quickly.”
Yudhishtra	stood	looking	at	the	face	of	the	man	who	had	dared	grab	Draupadi’s
hands	while	she	was	bathing.	When	a	distraught	tribal	had	told	them,	gasping
and	 panting,	 that	 Jayadratha	 had	 abducted	 Draupadi,	 he	 had	 not	 believed	 it.
Jayadratha	was	their	cousin	Sushala’s	husband;	whatever	their	differences	with
Suyodhana,	 all	 the	 Pandavas	 were	 fond	 of	 their	 little	 sister.	 Bhima	 had	 not
waited	 for	 permission	 before	 rushing	 off	 with	 his	 other	 brothers.	 Yudhishtra
had	been	forced	to	join	them.	He	did	not	want	to	face	Draupadi’s	accusations	in
case	the	tribal’s	story	was	true.
“I	am	sorry.	Let	me	go	now...”	Jayadratha	pleaded,	every	sign	of	arrogance	and
hauteur	having	long	fled.
Draupadi	laughed.	The	shrill	sound	frightened	the	birds	in	the	trees.	Why	did
she	laugh	in	that	way,	wondered	Yudhishtra,	as	he	remembered	the	proud	but
demure	 Princess	 they	 had	 taken	 home	 to	 Kunti.	 Jayadratha	 groaned	 again	 as
Bhima	pressed	on	his	spine.
“It	is	better	we	cut	off	his	head.”	Arjuna	pulled	out	his	sword	and	walked	over
to	where	Jayadratha	lay	grovelling	in	the	mud.
“No.	 Free	 him,”	 Yudhishtra	 said	 quietly,	 knowing	 the	 others	 would
vociferously	disagree	with	him.

“Free	 him?”	 Draupadi’s	 eyebrows	 arched	 in	 mocking	 surprise.	 “Oh,	 that	 is
how	 the	 men	 of	 the	 Kuru	 dynasty	 deal	 with	 men	 who	 misbehave	 with	 their
women.	 I	 had	 forgotten	 that	 it	 runs	 in	 the	 family.	 Pitamaha	 abducted	 women
for...”
“Enough!”	 Yudhishtra	 said,	 his	 voice	 like	 iron.	 “Not	 another	 word	 from	 you
about	Pitamaha	or	anyone	else,	Draupadi!”
“Of	course,	I	am	a	woman	and	not	allowed	to	speak.	They	strip	me	in	the	Sabha
and	you	all	quote	scriptures	and	remain	silent.	This	villain	tries	to	abduct	me
and	you	let	him	go	free	because	he	is	your	dear	cousin’s	husband.	But	I	should
feel	honoured	to	be	the	bride	of	the	Kurus,	who	consider	women	Goddesses.”
“I	do	not	care	what	Yudhishtra	says,	Draupadi.	If	you	ask	me	to,	I	will	wring
this	 man’s	 neck.”	 Bhima	 rubbed	 Jayadratha’s	 face	 in	 the	 mud.	 The	 King	 of
Sindh	uttered	a	miserable	cry.
“Let	him	go,	Bhima.	You	are	the	only	one	who	understands	me.	I	have	nothing
against	 Sushala,	 she	 is	 a	 sweet	 girl.	 But	 I	 pity	 her	 having	 this	 creature	 as	 her
husband,”	Draupadi	said	in	disgust.
Her	 husbands	 looked	 at	 each	 other	 in	 surprise.	 Bhima’s	 hands	 eased	 and
Jayadratha	groaned.
“It	is	generous	of	you	to	forgive	him,”	said	Yudhishtra.
“Forgive	him?	I	will	never	forgive	him	or	any	man	who	dares	harm	a	woman
just	because	nature	has	furnished	him	with	brute	force.	I	free	this	man	as	a	gift
to	Sushala	and	her	son.	But	the	world	should	know	what	he	has	done.	If	Sushala
still	 wants	 him	 as	 her	 husband	 after	 knowing	 about	 his	 deed,	 may	 God	 bless
her.	 I	 know	 she	 will	 eventually	 forgive	 him,	 as	 all	 women	 do.	 That	 is	 the
greatest	tragedy.	I,	too,	have	done	so,	as	have	many	other	women.	If	only	we
would	learn	that	to	forgive	is	also	to	encourage	such	acts…	No,	we	will	not	let
this	brute	go	free.	His	son	should	grow	up	knowing	his	father ’s	shame,	so	that
every	time	he	looks	at	a	woman,	he	does	not	see	an	object	of	desire.”
“Draupadi,	he	has	asked	forgiveness...”
Draupadi	 cut	 off	 Yudhishtra,	 her	 hand	 upraised.	 “Shave	 his	 head,	 Bhima,

leaving	only	five	hairs.	Tie	him	up	and	make	him	sit	back	to	front	on	a	donkey.
Then	 parade	 him	 through	 the	 villages,	 so	 that	 the	 whole	 world	 knows	 of	 his
misdeed.”
“No,	we	either	kill	him	or	free	him.	Insulting	him	and	then	letting	him	go	will
turn	him	into	a	dangerous	foe,”	Arjuna	said.
“I	have	five	great	warriors	as	husbands.	Why	should	I	fear	a	man	who	squirms
like	 a	 worm	 in	 Bhima’s	 hands?”	 Draupadi	 asked,	 her	 eyes	 blazing	 with
contempt.
All	 her	 husbands,	 except	 Yudhishtra,	 laughed.	 He	 walked	 away,	 shaking	 his
head	and	clutching	his	prayer	beads.
“Let	the	saint	go	and	pray.	Arjuna,	give	me	your	sword.	Our	dear	brother-inlaw	here	will	not	mind	if	I	take	off	some	skin	with	his	hair,”	Bhima	said.	His
brothers	laughed	in	delight.
Later,	 the	 ludicrous	 procession	 with	 Jayadratha	 tied	 to	 a	 donkey,	 his	 face
blackened	and	head	shaved	except	for	five	strands	of	hair,	wound	through	the
villages.	While	howling	urchins	danced	around	them,	the	villagers	beat	drums
to	announce	the	Donkey	King.
***
Shakuni	 looked	 at	 the	 messenger	 and	 ran	 a	 smug	 hand	 down	 his	 grey	 beard.
Then	 he	 sent	 the	 messenger	 to	 inform	 Suyodhana	 of	 how	 his	 brother-in-law
had	been	treated	by	the	Pandavas.
***
On	the	way	to	Gandhari’s	chamber,	Shakuni	 whispered	into	Suyodhana’s	ear,
“Remember,	the	Pandavas	have	taken	the	law	into	their	own	hands.	They	had	no
right	to	punish	Jayadratha.	They	should	have	appealed	to	you	or	to	the	King.”
Suyodhana	had	rushed	back	to	Hastinapura,	cutting	short	his	southern	journey.
How	 could	 Jayadratha	 have	 committed	 such	 folly?	 Suyodhana	 only	 had
Shakuni’s	version	to	rely	on	–	that	Jayadratha	had	made	some	lewd	remarks	in
bad	 taste,	 about	 Draupadi.	 But	 that	 did	 not	 warrant	 the	 punishment	 he	 had

received	 at	 the	 Pandavas’	 hands.	 Shakuni	 insisted	 that	 the	 rumours	 about
Jayadratha	trying	to	abduct	Draupadi	were	part	of	the	Pandavas’	plan	to	malign
Jayadratha	and	prove	Suyodhana	to	be	an	incompetent	ruler.
When	 Suyodhana	 entered	 the	 royal	 chamber,	 his	 father	 was	 standing	 with	 his
back	to	him	and	Gandhari	was	seated	at	a	window.	Suyodhana	motioned	to	his
uncle	to	remain	silent	and	Shakuni	moved	to	a	corner.
“Suyodhana,	is	my	brother	with	you?”	Gandhari	asked
“No,	mother,”	replied	her	son	after	an	instant’s	hesitation.
Gandhari	turned	to	where	Shakuni	stood.	“Shakuni,	leave	us.”	She	waited	until
she	was	sure	her	brother	had	walked	out	and	then	turned	to	Suyodhana.	“Your
lies	are	not	convincing	enough,	my	son.	There	is	some	hope	for	us	still.”
“Why	did	you	summon	me?”	Suyodhana	growled.
“Are	you	mad	to	order	your	Aunt	Kunti	out	of	Vidhura’s	old	home?”
“Why	is	my	mother	so	concerned	about	my	aunt?”
“Answer	me,	son.”
“We	 are	 evacuating	 all	 the	 houses	 in	 that	 street.	 Yuyutsu	 is	 building	 a	 new
market	there,”	Suyodhana	replied	curtly.
Gandhari	 pressed	 her	 lips	 together.	 The	 sudden	 cawing	 of	 a	 crow	 at	 the
window	 was	 irksome.	 “It	 is	 not	 wise	 to	 unnecessarily	 provoke,	 my	 son.	 You
will	 reinstate	 them	 with	 an	 order	 from	 the	 King.	 Is	 it	 clear,	 my	 son?”
Gandhari’s	words	were	as	hard	as	rock.
“I	 am	 sick	 of	 this	 drama,	 mother.	 Why	 must	 I	 be	 generous	 to	 the	 Pandavas
when	they	have	done	such	heinous	things	to	my	brother-in-law?”
“Who	 is	 this	 honourable	 brother-in-law	 you	 speak	 of?	 The	 same	 one	 who
molested	 a	 daughter-in-law	 of	 Hastinapura?”	 asked	 Gandhari,	 her	 voice	 like
ice.

“The	Pandavas	cannot	take	the	law	into	their	own	hands	and	do	whatever	they
please.	 They	 should	 have	 come	 to	 me	 for	 justice.	 I	 would	 have	 punished
Jayadratha.	Who	are	they	to	act	in	such	a	high	handed	manner?”
“Yudhishtra	 was	 kind	 enough	 to	 spare	 Jayadratha’s	 life.	 I	 am	 sure	 that
somewhere	 in	 this	 sordid	 affair	 lurks	 my	 brother ’s	 hand.	 My	 sons,	 Kunti’s
sons,	everyone	has	become	a	puppet	in	his	hands.	Send	him	back	to	Gandhara,
Sire!”
“What	makes	you	think	he	can	manipulate	me,	mother?	I	pounded	Gandhara	to
dust.	My	uncle	is	a	changed	man.	But,	by	taking	the	law	into	their	own	hands,
the	Pandavas	have	thrown	me	a	challenge.	I	ordered	Aunt	Kunti	out	because	I
decided	not	to	show	my	cousins	any	mercy.	Enough	is	enough!”
“But	 must	 you	 go	 out	 of	 your	 way	 to	 provoke	 them?	 Just	 find	 them	 during
their	 period	 of	 exile	 and	 force	 another	 twelve	 years	 of	 roaming	 in	 the
wilderness	upon	them.”
“They	 get	 away	 with	 so	 much	 in	 the	 name	 of	 dharma...”	 Suyodhana	 said
bitterly.
“Who	are	you	trying	to	fool,	Suyodhana?	Neither	of	you	is	wholly	right.	Both
of	you	have	made	grave	errors	of	judgement.”
“Mother,	 I	 am	 fighting	 for	 my	 rights.	 I	 have	 just	 returned	 from	 the	 South,
where	I	made	sweeping	changes.	My	people	love	me	because	I	am	a	just	ruler,”
argued	Suyodhana,	his	eyes	blazing	with	passion.
“So	you	think,	my	son.	This	year	is	crucial.	You	must	find	the	Pandavas	at	any
cost.	Keep	an	eye	on	Krishna.	Shakuni	is	no	match	for	him.	Krishna	will	create
deliberate	 provocations	 to	 throw	 you	 off	 their	 path.	 And	 you	 were	 foolish	 to
go	South	and	then	cause	mayhem	there.”
“I	did	what	was	right,	mother.	They	were	treating	my	subjects	like	filthy	pigs.”
“A	 great	 and	 noble	 act	 indeed!	 Tell	 me,	 son,	 which	 side	 will	 the	 Confederate
armies	fight	on	if	there	is	war?”
“The	people	will	stand	by	me.”

“A	good	politician	knows	when	to	act	noble	and	when	to	be	ruthless.	Politics	is
the	art	of	using	others	to	achieve	your	goals.”
What	 his	 mother	 said	 made	 cold-blooded	 sense,	 yet	 how	 could	 he	 have	 done
nothing	 on	 seeing	 the	 plight	 of	 people	 in	 the	 South?	 He	 missed	 his	 idealistic
youth,	when	he	had	done	as	he	had	pleased.	But	his	mother	was	right.	Having
held	power	for	twelve	years,	it	was	now	difficult	to	share	it	with	his	cousins.
“Son!”	 Dhritarashtra	 called.	 Suyodhana	 looked	 at	 his	 father	 in	 surprise.	 The
tone	 of	 his	 voice	 was	 unusually	 stern.	 “Listen	 to	 what	 your	 mother	 says.	 Let
Kunti	remain	where	she	is.	And	about	Jayadratha,	forget	the	entire	episode.	My
spies	tell	me	he	was	lucky	to	escape	with	his	life.	Had	I	known	the	entire	story
before	 he	 left	 Hastinapura	 in	 such	 a	 hurry	 with	 my	 daughter	 and	 grandson,	 I
would	 have	 ordered	 him	 to	 be	 thrown	 into	 the	 dungeons.	 You	 have	 a	 lot	 to
learn,	Suyodhana.	You	do	not	know	who	to	trust	and	who	not	to.	I	will	give	you
some	 good	 advice,	 if	 you	 are	 willing	 to	 listen	 to	 this	 blind,	 old	 man.	 Get
Jayadratha	 here	 and	 punish	 him	 in	 exemplary	 fashion.	 Do	 not	 worry	 what
Sushala	will	think.	She	is	my	daughter	and	she	will	understand.	That	is	the	only
way	to	redeem	yourself	in	the	eyes	of	the	public.	I	could	have	done	it	while	you
were	away,	but	I	wanted	you	to	do	it	and	show	everyone	that	you	do	the	right
thing	without	caring	whether	the	culprit	is	a	relative,	friend,	or	anyone	else.”
“But	father,	I	don’t	think	he	did...”
“Suyodhana,	I	used	to	regret	they	did	not	let	me	be	King	before	Pandu’s	death.
But	 I	 knew	 the	 answer	 on	 the	 day	 you	 tried	 to	 disrobe	 Draupadi	 so
dishonourably.	Your	mother	 wanted	me	to	order	your	 arrest	and	punishment;
to	 strip	 Karna	 of	 his	 kingship.	 I	 felt	 smug	 that	 I	 was	 the	 only	 man	 there	 who
tried	to	correct	a	wrong.	I	argued	with	your	mother	that	Pandu’s	gambling	son
deserved	nothing	better;	that	it	was	a	small	price	for	the	insults	I	had	suffered
for	 having	 been	 born	 blind.	 She	 told	 me	 then	 that	 she	 was	 not	 speaking	 of
dharma	 or	 taking	 a	 high	 moral	 stand,	 but	 pure	 strategy.	 Had	 I	 done	 what	 she
suggested,	I	would	have	established	my	position	as	the	most	righteous	king	in
the	 history	 of	 the	 Kuru	 clan.	 But	 I	 did	 not;	 not	 because	 she	 was	 wrong,	 your
mother	is	rarely	wrong;	I	declined	because	it	would	have	been	devastating	for
you,	my	son.	There	is	no	one	dearer	to	me	than	you,	Suyodhana,	not	even	the
throne	of	Hastinapura.	Now	I	want	you	to	achieve	what	I	could	not.	My	life	is
spent	 but	 you	 can	 be	 the	 greatest	 ruler	 in	 Bharatavarsha.	 Do	 what	 I	 say,	 son.

Bring	Jayadratha	here.”
“Father,	what	you	say	may	be	right.	I	know	it	is	what	I	should	do.	But	I	cannot.
Jayadratha	is	my	friend.	Even	if	he	had	done	wrong,	is	it	not	my	duty	to	stand
by	him?”
“You	 are	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 of	 Hastinapura,	 son.	 For	 a	 King	 there	 are	 no
permanent	friends	or	foes,”	Dhritarashtra	said,	tapping	his	stick	on	the	floor	in
impatience.
“Forgive	me,	father.	I	will	not	seek	revenge	against	the	Pandavas	for	what	they
have	 done	 to	 Jayadratha,	 but	 I	 cannot	 punish	 him.	 He	 stood	 by	 me	 when	 it
mattered.	Without	his	three	thousand	men,	Karna	could	not	have	conquered	the
South.	I	cannot	be	ungrateful.”
“Your	 son	 is	 heedless;	 worse,	 he	 is	 an	 emotional	 fool,”	 snapped	 Gandhari
from	her	seat	by	the	window.	“His	friends	will	be	his	ruin.	It	is	now	too	late	to
act	 against	 Jayadratha	 while	 Suyodhana’s	 entire	 trip	 to	 the	 South	 has	 been	 a
disaster.”
“Mother,	I	have	done	what	no	ruler	before	has	done	for	the	people.	They	adore
me.	They	have	built	a	temple	in	my	name.”
“You	will	realise	your	mistake	one	day,	but	I	am	afraid	it	will	be	too	late	then,”
Gandhari	sighed.	“Read	this.”	She	extended	a	palm	leaf	towards	Suyodhana.	It
had	Balarama’s	royal	seal.
When	 he	 had	 finished	 reading,	 Suyodhana	 said,	 “But	 Kumara	 is	 a	 boy,	 just
sixteen.”
“What	does	that	have	to	do	with	anything?	I	have	heard	Balarama’s	daughter,
Valsala,	 is	 a	 beauty.	 She	 would	 be	 the	 perfect	 wife	 for	 our	 Lakshmana
Kumara.”
“But	mother,	have	you	thought...”
“Suyodhana,	 it	 won’t	 hurt	 you	 to	 have	 Balarama	 on	 your	 side	 through	 this
alliance.”

“Have	the	children	returned	from	Dwaraka?”
“Not	yet.	Your	boy	is	not	as	innocent	as	he	seems.	He	has	succeeded	in	wooing
Balarama’s	daughter	and	impressing	the	Yadavas.”
“Has	Krishna	given	his	consent	to	the	alliance?	He	hates	me.”
“As	usual,	you	underestimate	Krishna,	my	son.	He	has	no	permanent	enemies
or	friends,”	Gandhari	replied	with	a	smile.
“Let	me	think	 it	over.	I	must	 discuss	it	with	Bhanu.”	Suyodhana	bowed	to	his
parents	and	turned	to	leave	the	chamber.
“And	revoke	the	order	to	evict	Kunti,”	Gandhari	said	to	her	son’s	rigid	back.
Suyodhana	reluctantly	nodded,	knowing	his	mother	would	know	he	had	agreed
despite	her	bandaged	eyes.
“Valsala	and	Lakshmana	Kumara	would	make	a	great	pair,”	Shakuni	suggested,
limping	behind	Suyodhana.
“How	do	you	know	about	the	proposal?”	Suyodhana	asked,	irritated.
“Oh,	 I	 met	 the	 messenger	 in	 the	 palace	 garden	 and	 he	 told	 me.	 What	 has
happened,	 nephew?	 It	 seems	 you	 do	 not	 trust	 your	 old	 uncle.	 You	 think	 I	 had
my	ear	to	the	keyhole?”
Suyodhana	 said	 nothing.	 He	 had	 to	 talk	 to	 Bhanumati.	 He	 already	 knew	 she
would	agree	to	whatever	their	son	wanted.
“Suyodhana,	 people	 are	 making	 fun	 of	 us.	 The	 Pandavas	 have	 insulted	 your
brother-in-law.	If	we	do	nothing	it	would	be	like	accepting	Jayadratha’s	guilt,”
said	Shakuni,	hoping	to	catch	the	Prince’s	attention.
“We	will	hunt	for	them	and	blow	their	cover.	Good	night.”	Suyodhana	shut	the
door	to	his	chamber.
Shakuni	stood	staring	at	the	closed	door,	his	brain	in	turmoil.	Once	again	his
sister	 had	 outwitted	 him.	 He	 had	 expected	 the	 Jayadratha	 episode	 to	 flare	 up
into	a	conflict,	but	it	had	fizzled	out	tamely.	He	had	underestimated	the	King;

his	brother-in-law	looked	and	acted	like	a	fool,	but	it	was	a	deceptive	veneer,
Shakuni	 thought	 with	 grudging	 respect.	 He	 knew	 the	 embers	 were	 still
simmering;	at	the	right	time,	he	would	blow	on	them.	For	now	he	had	to	accept
defeat.	 But	 a	 chaotic	 Indian	 marriage	 offered	 wide	 possibilities,	 with	 throngs
of	people	milling	around.	It	would	also	make	it	easier	for	him	to	visit	his	old
friend,	Durjaya,	in	his	dungeon.	If	he	could	do	something	to	ignite	the	rivalry
between	the	cousins,	it	would	be	a	bonus.	The	dice	would	roll	his	way	again.
*****

26			SON	OF	GOD
	
DWARAKA	WAS	FULL	OF	GAIETY.	It	was	the	first	night	of	Navaratri.	Krishna	would

hold	people	spellbound	with	his	magical	flute	and	discourse	for	the	next	nine
nights.	 Women	 of	 all	 ages	 fought	 to	 dance	 with	 the	 handsome	 Prince.	 He
bestowed	 his	 charm	 upon	 all,	 making	 every	 woman	 feel	 beautiful,	 each	 one
special.	 He	 was	 the	 eternal	 romantic,	 the	 consummate	 lover.	 They	 were
enchanting	nights,	and	Princess	Lakshmana	felt	she	had	arrived	in	a	world	of
magic.
Subhadra	 arrived	 to	 inquire	if	Lakshmana	had	eaten	anything.	Aunt	Subhadra
was	so	beautiful,	sighed	the	young	girl.	She	wondered	if	there	was	any	truth	to
the	persistent	rumour	that	her	father	and	Subhadra	had	once	been	lovers.	She
could	 hardly	 blame	 him.	 Sometimes	 even	 she	 wished	 she	 was	 Subhadra’s
daughter	 instead	 of	 her	 own	 stern	 mother ’s.	 She	 knew	 she	 should	 quell	 such
thoughts.	Lakshmana	missed	her	father,	but	even	more	than	him	she	missed	the
one	man	who	always	treated	her	like	the	Princess	she	was.
Whenever	 she	 had	 been	 sad	 and	 unhappy,	 Ekalavya	 had	 always	 been	 there	 to
console	 and	 cheer	 her.	 He	 would	 bow	 before	 her	 without	 caring	 who	 saw	 or
heard	him	call	her	his	Little	Princess,	to	the	point	of	making	her	blush.	Their
special	 friendship	 had	 started	 when	 she	 was	 three	 years	 old.	 The	 Nishada’s
presence	kept	many	wagging	tongues	busy	but	her	father	had	never	cared	about
anyone’s	 lineage,	 only	 their	 abilities.	 Lakshmana	 did	 not	 even	 know	 what
lineage	meant.	Almost	twelve	years	ago	Ekalavya	had	given	her	his	word	that
he	 would	 allow	 no	 harm	 to	 befall	 her,	 ever.	 She	 knew	 they	 were	 not	 playful
words	 said	to	amuse	 a	little	girl,	but	 a	promise	made	with	pride,	honour	 and
love.
The	 only	 thing	 they	 disagreed	 about	 was	 Lord	 Krishna.	 Like	 most	 girls	 her
age,	 Lakshmana	 loved	 to	 hear	 the	 romantic	 stories	 the	 bards	 spun	 about	 the
handsome	 Yadava’s	 childhood.	 Lord	 Krishna	 was	 an	 enigma.	 When	 Aunt

Subhadra	had	introduced	Lakshmana	to	her	brother,	the	first	thought	that	struck
Lakshmana	 was	 how	 handsome	 he	 was.	 His	 smile	 lit	 up	 the	 whole	 world,	 yet
she	felt	he	was	smiling	just	for	her.	He	was	kind	and	considerate	and	called	her
‘daughter ’	 while	 blessing	 her.	 Despite	 herself,	 Suyodhana’s	 daughter	 felt	 she
was	 falling	 in	 love	 with	 him,	 like	 so	 many	 hapless	 women	 before	 her.	 Aunt
Subhadra	 later	 remarked	 that	 her	 brother	 had	 that	 effect	 on	 most	 women,
irrespective	of	age.
Lakshmana’s	meeting	with	Krishna’s	elder	brother	had	gone	according	to	her
expectations.	 Lord	 Balarama	 was	 just	 like	 her	 father	 had	 said	 –	 kind	 and
affable.	 She	 had	 formed	 an	 awkward	 friendship	 with	 Valsala,	 Balarama’s
daughter,	 who	 was	 the	 same	 age	 as	 her.	 They	 chatted	 about	 everything	 under
the	 sun	 while	 Abhimanyu	 tried	 teaching	 Kumara	 archery.	 Later,	 the	 four	 of
them	would	lie	in	the	garden	and	stare	up	at	the	star-filled	sky.	Kumara	would
sing	 the	 poems	 he	 had	 composed	 and	 Lakshmana	 would	 float	 to	 a	 world	 of
romance.	Abhimanyu	and	Valsala	often	giggled	when	the	Prince	sang,	and	that
made	her	boil	with	resentment	against	them	both.
This	 evening	 was	 no	 different.	 The	 four	 of	 them	 were	 sitting	 on	 the	 lawn
watching	the	arrangements	for	Navaratri.	Abhimanyu	and	Valsala	sat	together
and	 whispered,	 while	 Kumara	 sang.	 When	 he	 finished,	 there	 was	 unexpected
applause	 from	 near	 them.	 “Shabash,	 son!”	 Krishna	 stood	 beaming	 at	 them.
They	 had	 not	 seen	 him	 coming.	 Valsala	 and	 Abhimanyu	 broke	 into	 fits	 of
laughter.	Kumara	hung	his	head	as	if	Krishna	had	caught	him	doing	something
shameful.	 Krishna	 put	 an	 arm	 around	 Kumara’s	 shoulders	 and	 whispered
something	 into	 his	 ear.	 Kumara’s	 face	 lit	 up	 with	 joy.	 Then	 Lord	 Krishna
pulled	out	his	flute	from	his	waistband	and	began	playing.	Kumara	closed	his
eyes	in	rapture;	his	beautiful	baritone	voice	rose	above	the	music	of	the	flute	in
an	arc	of	melody	which	soared	and	soared.
When	 he	 finished	 and	 opened	 his	 eyes,	 everyone	 in	 the	 Dwaraka	 palace	 was
standing	 around	 them,	 clapping.	 Kumara	 looked	 embarrassed	 by	 the	 first
appreciation	he	had	ever	received	for	his	talent.
Lord	Krishna	went	up	to	him	and	asked	softly,	“What	is	the	matter,	son?”
“I	do	not	wish	to	be	a	warrior.”

There	 was	 a	 horrified	 murmuring	 from	 the	 crowd.	 Valsala	 giggled	 with	 her
hand	over	her	mouth.	‘How	dare	she	mock	my	brother?’	thought	Lakshmana	in
fury.
“Follow	 your	 heart,	 son.	 That	 is	 your	dharma.	 Do	 not	 worry	 about	 what	 the
world	thinks.	The	world	is	transient,	but	you	are	eternal.”	Without	waiting	for
an	answer,	Krishna	moved	into	the	crowd	and	the	dancing	resumed.	Lakshmana
had	never	seen	her	brother	so	happy	before.	Before	long,	Abhimanyu	dragged
Kumara	into	the	party	frenzy.
Later,	she	overheard	Lord	Balarama	talking	to	his	wife,	Rohini,	about	how	he
hoped	 their	 Valsala	 would	 marry	 Kumara.	 When	 Rohini	 commented	 that	 the
young	Prince	showed	no	Kshatriya	qualities,	Balarama	replied	sharply	that	the
world	 had	 enough	 idiots	 running	 around	 killing	 each	 other,	 without	 Kumara
adding	to	their	number.	Though	Lakshmana	could	not	help	but	smile	when	she
heard	it,	she	did	not	like	the	idea	one	bit.	Something	was	obviously	going	on
between	her	cousin	Abhimanyu	and	Lord	Balarama’s	daughter.	She	looked	at
her	dreamy-eyed	brother	sitting	near	the	jasmine	bush,	his	gaze	never	leaving
Valsala.	 He	 was	 hopelessly	 in	 love	 with	 a	 girl	 who	 scorned	 him	 and	 loved
another.	Lakshmana	thought	she	would	have	to	keep	an	eye	on	Kumara.
But	something	else	was	making	her	uneasy	as	well.	It	was	as	if	someone	was
continually	 watching	 her,	 ravishing	 her	 with	 lustful	 eyes.	 She	 felt	 naked	 and
vulnerable.	She	could	sense	an	evil	presence	near	her.	Even	when	Abhimanyu
dragged	her	into	the	crowd	to	dance,	she	could	not	rid	herself	of	the	feeling.
For	an	instant	she	thought	of	telling	her	cousin,	but	was	afraid	he	would	make
a	joke	out	of	it.	What	was	there	to	fear	among	this	gay	and	laughing	crowd?
Unexpectedly,	 a	 hand	 reached	 out	 between	 the	 press	 of	 people	 and	 pulling
down	 the	 front	 of	 her	 blouse,	 groped	 her	 breast.	 Lakshmana	 was	 shocked,
humiliated	 and	 embarrassed.	 She	 briefly	 saw	 a	 leering	 face	 before	 the	 man
vanished	 into	 the	 crowd.	 Lakshmana	 wanted	 to	 scream.	 How	 dared	 he?	 Even
her	lips	felt	frozen.	She	sat	down,	the	crowd	pressing	around	her,	afraid	even
to	cry.	The	music	stopped.	Many	people	had	seen	the	incident	and	others	were
now	looking	at	her,	asking	what	had	happened.	Meaningless	questions.	She	had
done	nothing	wrong.	Some	bastard	had	touched	her.	She	sat	in	terrified	silence.
‘How	will	I	face	everyone?	Mother	warned	me	about	such	situations,	about	my
dress,	 my	 walk,	 my	 talk,’	 thought	 Lakshmana	 regretfully.	 She	 had	 rebelled,

calling	her	mother	old-fashioned.	Who	would	possibly	dare	touch	the	daughter
of	 Crown	 Prince	 Suyodhana?	 Her	 mother ’s	 words	 came	 back	 to	 her	 with
alarming	 clarity	 now,	 that	 it	 did	 not	 matter	 whether	 she	 was	 a	 princess	 or	 a
beggar,	dark	or	fair,	eight	or	eighty,	she	was	a	woman,	and	men	would	always
be	 men.	 It	 was	 her	 duty	 to	 be	 careful.	 ‘I	 failed	 you,	 mother.	 I	 am	 so	 sorry.	 I
should	have	been	more	careful.	I	feel	so	ashamed	now	of	my	dress,	my	hair,
my	 face...’	 Lakshmana	 pulled	 at	 the	 bodice	 of	 her	 dress,	 afraid	 people	 would
gossip	about	her	character.
Aunt	Subhadra’s	hand	lifted	her	chin.	Lakshmana	wanted	to	get	up	and	run	to
some	place	where	nobody	knew	her,	but	Subhadra	pulled	her	close.	Lakshmana
buried	her	head	in	Subhadra’s	bosom	and	cried.	She	could	hear	Lord	Balarama
shouting	 orders	 and	 people	 running.	 She	 also	 heard	 whispers	 about	 the
inappropriateness	 of	 her	 clothes.	 Lakshmana	 closed	 her	 ears.	 Leaning	 on
Subhadra’s	 shoulder,	 she	 dragged	 herself	 to	 her	 room.	 As	 she	 was	 about	 to
enter,	something	made	her	turn	back.	What	she	saw	would	remain	with	her	to
her	 dying	 day.	 Lord	 Krishna	 was	 staring	 at	 someone,	 his	 eyes	 aflame	 with
murderous	rage.	Lakshmana’s	heart	stopped.	The	man	who	had	disgraced	her
was	none	other	than	Lord	Krishna’s	son,	Samba.	Krishna	gazed	at	his	son	with
disgust	and	then	turned	away.	Fleetingly,	his	eyes	met	hers.	They	pleaded	with
her.	The	great	man	was	begging	her	not	to	expose	his	son.
Lakshmana	allowed	herself	to	be	pulled	into	her	room.	She	had	lost	all	interest
in	being	in	Dwaraka.	Subhadra	sat	with	her	for	some	time,	comforting	her,	but
the	 gaiety	 outside	 beckoned.	 The	 dancing	 had	 resumed.	 The	 insult	 to	 a
woman’s	 modesty	 was	 an	 insignificant	 hiccup	 on	 a	 festive	 night.	 Finally
Subhadra	left,	asking	Lakshmana	to	bolt	the	door	and	try	to	sleep.
Lakshmana	sat	on	the	bed	watching	her	shadow	dance	on	the	wall	as	the	lamp
flickered.	The	tears	dried	on	her	cheeks	and	she	did	not	know	when	she	slipped
into	 a	 disturbed	 sleep.	 Unknown	 to	 her,	 a	 pair	 of	 eyes	 were	 watching	 her
through	a	crack	in	the	door.
*****

27			LUSTFUL	EYES
	
WHEN	 LAKSHMANA	 ARRIVED	 IN	 HASTINAPURA,	

the	 city	 was	 bubbling	 with
excitement.	Kumara’s	marriage	was	a	great	occasion	and	the	city	streets	were
festooned	with	colourful	buntings.	People	had	come	from	all	over	the	country
and	they	broke	into	spontaneous	singing	and	dancing.	She	still	felt	guilty	about
what	had	happened	at	Dwaraka.	She	would	have	liked	to	have	told	her	mother
but	 was	 unsure	 how	 she	 would	 take	 it.	 The	 last	 thing	 she	 wanted	 was	 for	 her
mother	to	chaperone	her	everywhere.	Her	father	seemed	to	be	constantly	busy,
always	with	great-uncle	Shakuni	at	his	heels.	But	where	was	Ekalavya?
That	evening,	the	bridal	party	arrived	from	Dwaraka.	Krishna	and	his	favourite
wife,	 Rukmini,	 were	 the	 first	 to	 alight,	 followed	 by	 Balarama	 and	 Rohini.
Suyodhana	bent	to	touch	Balarama’s	feet	in	reverence,	as	did	all	the	Kauravas.
Suyodhana	and	Krishna	bowed	politely	to	each	other,	followed	by	a	brief,	stiff
hug.	Shakuni,	who	was	standing	behind,	also	bowed	to	Krishna,	who	returned
the	courtesy	with	a	smile	–	a	challenge	offered	and	accepted.
Bhanumati	 was	 trying	 to	 judge	 Valsala.	 No	 girl	 in	 the	 world	 would	 ever	 be
good	enough	for	her	son.	Abhimanyu	tried	to	joke	but	his	usual	vivacity	was
missing.	 His	 long	 fingers	 briefly	 touched	 Valsala’s	 hand.	 Lakshmana	 saw	 the
look	that	passed	between	them	and	almost	stopped	breathing.	Why	had	Valsala
agreed	to	this	match	if	she	was	so	much	in	love	with	Abhimanyu,	she	wondered
fiercely.	She	had	to	speak	to	someone.	Her	mother	was	busy	with	the	reception
of	Krishna’s	many	wives.	Lakshmana	had	to	warn	her	brother.
Suddenly	she	felt	warm	breath	on	the	back	of	her	neck.	Who	could	be	playing
pranks?	 She	 turned	 back	 in	 irritation	 and	 all	 the	 stifled	 dread	 of	 the	 last	 few
weeks	came	rushing	back.	She	crossed	her	hands	over	her	breasts	and	hurried
off	to	find	her	mother.	Bhanumati	immediately	began	introducing	her	daughter
to	Krishna’s	many	wives,	all	of	whom	smiled	and	said	how	majestic	the	palace
was,	 how	 beautiful	 the	 gardens,	 how	 pretty	 the	 whole	 scene!	 Caught	 in	 an

endless	 round	 of	 chatter,	 Lakshmana	 kept	 mumbling	 greetings,	 trying
desperately	to	keep	her	smile	in	place.	But	the	fear	of	Samba’s	presence	close
by	was	hard	to	ignore.	Surely	she	had	nothing	to	worry	about?	No	one	would
dare	touch	her	here,	she	kept	telling	herself.	Then	she	saw	him	leaning	against
a	 pillar,	 ravishing	 her	 with	 his	 eyes.	 Samba	 winked	 and	 gestured	 obscenely.
Even	 in	 her	 father ’s	 palace,	 Lakshmana	 felt	 suddenly	 vulnerable.	 She	 was	 no
longer	safe.
*****

28			MISSION	DANGEROUS
	
“WHAT	 DO	 YOU	 MEAN,	 YOU	 LOVE	 EACH	 OTHER? 	 Why	 on	 earth	 did	 you	 agree	 to

marry	Kumara	then?”	Krishna	asked	his	niece.
“Father	was	so	happy	about	it,”	Valsala	said,	choking	down	sobs.
This	was	getting	difficult.	While	Krishna	had	never	been	keen	on	the	marriage,
his	 brother	 could	 be	 obstinate.	 Besides,	 Lakshmana	 Kumara	 was	 rather
likeable,	not	at	all	arrogant	like	his	father.	With	training,	he	could	be	made	to
understand	 the	 nuances	 of	 dharma.	 But	 Valsala’s	 confession	 had	 changed
everything.
“Leave	it	to	me,”	Krishna	said	finally.
Abhimanyu	 and	 Valsala	 looked	 at	 each	 other,	 relieved.	 “You	 are	 our	 only
hope,”	Valsala	said	to	her	uncle.
Krishna	 looked	 at	 them	 wryly	 and	 placed	 his	 hand	 on	 his	 niece’s	 head	 in
affection.	 The	 young	 lovers	 walked	 away,	 leaving	 Krishna	 worried.	 Had	 he
committed	 to	 more	 than	 he	 could	 deliver?	 Years	 before,	 he	 had	 rescued	 his
sister	Subhadra	from	Duryodhana	on	the	eve	of	their	marriage.	Now	it	was	the
turn	of	Subhadra’s	son.	He	would	have	to	make	Lakshmana	Kumara	look	like	a
fool	and	turn	Balarama	against	Duryodhana	in	order	to	compel	Duryodhana	to
call	 off	 the	 marriage.	 Could	 he	 pull	 it	 off?	 He	 regretted	 having	 to	 do	 it	 to
Duryodhana’s	soft-spoken	son,	but	there	was	no	choice.	Krishna	was	one	of	the
few	who	knew	where	the	Pandavas	were	hiding.	It	had	now	become	necessary
to	 talk	 to	 Arjuna	 and	 ask	 for	 Bhima’s	 help.	 His	 head	 whirling	 with	 plans,
Krishna	galloped	off	in	search	of	the	Pandavas.	There	was	no	time	to	lose.
***
“I	 know,	Arjuna,	 it	is	not	an	 ideal	situation,	but	we	must	think	of	Abhimanyu

and	 Valsala’s	 happiness.	 Also,	 if	 the	 marriage	 takes	 place,	 it	 will	 strengthen
Duryodhana’s	position.	It	is	in	our	own	interest	to	stop	it.”
“Abhimanyu	should	have	told	us	this	before.	This	is	a	dishonourable	thing	to
do,”	Yudhishtra	mumbled.	In	the	pale	moonlight,	it	was	difficult	to	discern	his
expression.
Krishna	clucked	his	tongue	impatiently.	“You	want	to	be	the	eternal	wanderer?
Don’t	you	want	to	sit	on	the	throne	of	Hastinapura	and	rule	Bharatavarsha	as
per	the	tenets	of	dharma?”
Yudhishtra	 remained	 silent	 but	 a	 mirthless	 laugh	 sounded	 nearby.	 Draupadi
emerged	from	the	shadows.	“Dishonourable?	Honour	died	in	the	Hastinapura
Sabha.	Duryodhana	and	his	cronies	deserve	no	mercy.”
Krishna	 smiled	 at	 Draupadi.	 “We	 have	 to	 shame	 the	 poor	 boy	 but	 it	 can’t	 be
helped.	 People	 must	 say	 Lakshmana	 Kumara	 is	 an	 unworthy	 husband	 for
Balarama’s	daughter.”
“How	will	you	do	it?	It’s	a	dangerous	game,	Krishna,”	Nakula	said.
“Dangerous?	Cowards!”	Draupadi	raised	her	voice.	Her	five	husbands	did	not
dare	meet	her	gaze.	“Krishna,	these	men,	if	they	can	be	called	that,	have	grown
soft	eating	nuts	and	berries.	I	will	come	with	you	instead.”
“No,	Draupadi,”	Krishna	gently	shook	his	head.	“Don’t	forget	the	terms.	If	they
recognize	you,	it	will	mean	another	12	years	of	exile.”
“Tchaw!	 Conditions	 of	 a	 rigged	 game	 of	 dice;	 unchallenged	 because	 my
husbands	lacked	the	courage	to	do	so.	Krishna,	take	me	to	the	palace	and	I	will
thrust	my	dagger	down	Duryodhana’s	throat.”
“Peace,	my	lady,	peace,”	Krishna	said	and	turned	to	Bhima.	“I	need	your	help.”
“You	have	only	to	ask,”	Bhima	instantly	replied,	bowing	low.
“Good.	Come	with	me.	We	have	to	go	over	the	mountain	to	meet	someone	who
is	prepared	to	do	anything	for	you.”

“I	 do	 not	 know	 anyone	 living	 over	 that	 mountain,	 Krishna,”	 said	 Bhima,
puzzlement	written	on	his	broad,	handsome	face.
“Ah,	but	he	knows	you,	Bhima,”	Krishna	replied	with	a	small	smile.
“But	that	is	the	kingdom	of	the	despicable	Ekalavya,”	Arjuna	cried.
“The	Nishada	will	be	on	his	way	to	attend	the	wedding.	Bhima	and	I	can	slip	in,
do	our	work	and	get	out	fast.	It	is	best	that	the	rest	of	you	proceed	to	my	vassal
kingdom	 of	 Virata,	 in	 disguise.	 It	 is	 the	 ideal	 place	 to	 finish	 your	 incognito
period	of	exile.”
“Duryodhana’s	spies	are	everywhere.	Hiding	will	be	difficult,”	Yudhishtra	said,
his	voice	tinged	with	weariness.
“Enter	Matsya,	the	capital	city,	separately.	Yudhishtra,	you	will	present	yourself
as	a	dice	expert.	The	Virata	King	is	passionate	about	the	game.	It	will	then	be
simple	for	you	to	create	a	place	for	yourself	as	the	King’s	adviser.”
“Ah	 yes!	 Yudhishtra	 is	 indeed	 an	 expert	 in	 the	 game	 of	 dice,”	 Draupadi	 said,
her	 mouth	 twisted	 with	 mockery.	 Everyone	 laughed,	 and	 even	 Yudhishtra
smiled.
“Arjuna	can	be	a	eunuch	–	a	teacher	of	dance	and	the	fine	arts.”
“Krishna,	how	can	you	suggest	such	a	thing?”	Arjuna	protested	as	his	brothers
rocked	with	laughter	and	Draupadi	nodded	in	agreement.
“Nakula	and	 Sahadeva	can	work	in	the	 royal	 stables,”	Krishna	said,	ignoring
Arjuna’s	indignant	protests.
“And	 I?”	 Draupadi	 asked.	 In	 all	 their	 plans,	 she	 appeared	 to	 have	 been
forgotten.
“My	lady,	you	shall	be	chief	maid	to	the	Queen,	the	sairandhri.”	“How	can	she
be	a	maid?	Draupadi	is	a	Princess,”	Bhima	protested.
“Princess!”	 Draupadi	 snorted.	 “I	 will	 take	 the	 position,	 Krishna,	 if	 it	 is
available.	At	least	I	will	have	food	to	eat	and	a	roof	over	my	head.”

“What	of	Bhima?”	Yudhishtra	asked	quietly.
“Once	we	are	back	from	our	journey,	he	will	apply	for	a	position	as	a	cook	in
the	royal	kitchens,”	Krishna	said.	Bhima	grinned;	he	had	a	role	he	would	love
to	 play.	 “But	 remember,	 none	 of	 you	 must	 ever	 be	 seen	 together,”	 Krishna
cautioned.	 “Now	 you	 must	 be	 off	 immediately,	 before	 anyone	 suspects	 you
were	here	or	where	you	have	gone.”
Long	after	the	four	Pandavas	and	Draupadi	had	left,	Krishna	kept	thinking	of
how	to	pull	off	the	audacious	plan	he	had	in	his	mind.	It	all	depended	on	Bhima
and	Ekalavya	not	being	present.
As	 day	 broke	 over	 the	 eastern	 horizon,	 Krishna	 and	 Bhima	 rode	 in	 silence
towards	 the	 looming	 mountain	 in	 the	 north,	 into	 the	 kingdom	 ruled	 by	 the
Nishada,	in	search	of	a	Rakshasi’s	son.
*****

29			SONS	OF	FORTUNE
	
SUSHALA	 DRAGGED	 HER	 SON	 TO	 ACHARYA	 KRIPA.	

After	 the	 shameful	 episode
involving	her	husband,	Jayadratha	was	as	good	as	lost	to	her.	He	was	abusive
and	 spent	 more	 time	 in	 his	 harem	 with	 the	 women	 he	 collected	 by	 force	 or
purchase.	But	she	did	not	dare	leave	him	for	ear	of	the	stigma	that	she	had	not
been	able	to	satisfy	her	husband.	Nor	did	she	dare	tell	her	brother,	fearing	his
wrath.	All	her	hopes	were	pinned	on	her	son,	Suratha.	Unfortunately,	the	boy
had	 failed	 to	 meet	 his	mother ’s	great	expectations	of	a	warrior	son.	The	boy
was	 afraid	 of	 his	 demanding	 mother	 and	 abusive	 father	 and	 rarely	 spoke	 a
word.	He	was	not	a	dreamer	like	his	cousin	Lakshmana	Kumara,	but	a	boy	who
feared	the	world.
“Acharya	Kripa,	only	you	can	help	him,”	Sushala	said,	her	hands	folded	before
the	maverick	Brahmin	Guru	in	supplication.
Kripa	eyed	the	shy	boy	with	pity	and	distaste.	He	was	sitting	in	his	usual	place
under	the	 tree	by	the	river.	People	going	to	the	temple	bowed	to	him	and	the
Queen	 of	 Sindh	 as	 they	 walked	 by.	 Nearby,	 a	 cow	 munched	 on	 the	 banana
leaves	the	priests	had	carelessly	thrown	out	after	distributing	prasad.
“Are	there	not	enough	Gurus	in	Sindh	who	can	instruct	him?”
“None	 of	 them	 as	 good	 as	 you,	 Guru.	 They	 are	 unable	 to	 teach	 him	 well,”
Sushala	 said,	 praying	 Acharya	 Kripa	 would	 agree.	 That	 would	 give	 her	 an
excuse	to	remain	in	Hastinapura	without	setting	tongues	wagging.
Kripa	leapt	from	his	seat	and	punched	the	little	boy.	Sushala	was	shocked	at	the
Guru’s	 action.	 Suratha	 began	 to	 wail	 fearfully,	 clutching	 his	 mother ’s	 pallu.
Sushala	pulled	her	son	to	her,	glaring	at	the	crazy	Guru.
“Princess,	 he	 cannot	 handle	 pain.	 You	 have	 made	 him	 too	 soft.	 It	 will	 be	 an
uphill	 task	 to	 make	 him	 into	 a	 warrior.	 It	 would	 be	 better	 to	 teach	 him

administration	 and	 mathematics.	 Take	 him	 to	 Vidhura.	 I	 shall	 send	 word	 to
him.”
“No,	Guru.	I	wish	him	to	be	a	great	warrior	when	he	grows	up.	I	beg	you	to
take	him	as	your	disciple.	I	will	pay	whatever	you	ask.”	Sushala	hated	herself
for	crying	in	front	of	the	heartless	Guru.
Kripa	 laughed.	 “Pay?	 You	 will	 pay	 me	 from	 what	 your	 husband	 has	 stolen
from	 the	 people	 of	 Sindh?	 I	 would	 rather	 starve	 to	 death	 before	 I	 take	 that
money.	Moreover,	I	cannot	take	payment	for	a	job	which	I	am	sure	will	benefit
neither	 the	 teacher	 nor	 the	 student.	 My	 lady,	 your	 son	 is	 not	 destined	 to	 be
warrior.	Why	should	everyone	be	a	warrior?	I	am	sure	the	boy	will	grow	up	to
be	a	decent	man	and	perhaps	a	good	king,	if	you	let	him.”
“I	want	him	to	be	a	Digvijayi,	to	be	Emperor	of	Bharatavarsha	when	the	time
comes,”	 Sushala	 blurted,	 regretting	 it	 the	 moment	 the	 words	 escaped	 her
mouth.	 Her	 son	 clutched	 her	 tighter,	 sniffling.	 Kripa	 looked	 at	 her	 with	 an
amused	smile	and	she	averted	her	gaze.
“There	 are	 unscrupulous	 Gurus	 who	 will	 take	 your	 money	 and	 torture	 your
poor	 child,	 badgering	 him	 to	 become	 what	 he	 is	 not.	 He	 is	 not	 made	 to	 be	 a
warrior.	Thank	your	stars	that	it	is	so.	Send	him	to	Vidhura.”
“I	don’t	want	my	son	to	learn	from	a	Shudra.	Do	you	wish	the	whole	world	to
laugh	 at	 him?	 I	 know	 why	 you	 do	 not	 wish	 to	 teach	 him,	 Guru.	 You	 have
always	sided	with	the	Pandavas.	You	think	my	son	will	grow	up	to	be	a	threat	to
Arjuna	one	day	and	so	you	wish	to	discourage	me.”
“I	am	afraid	your	son	will	defeat	Arjuna?	My	lady,	the	sun	is	very	hot	and	can
muddle	 the	 brain	 of	 those	 not	 used	 to	 its	 harshness.	 Please	 go	 back	 to	 the
palace.”
“Guru,	you	insult	me	with	your	condescending	words.”
“Pardon	me,	Princess,	I	meant	no	insult.	It	was	but	the	advice	of	an	old	Guru	to
one	who	is	like	a	daughter	to	me.	Do	not	compel	your	poor	son	to	be	what	he
is	not.”
“You	 are	 not	 the	 only	 Guru,	 Acharya	 Kripa.	 I	 will	 hire	 the	 best	 teachers	 in

Bharatavarsha	or	beyond.	Mark	my	words,	my	son	Suratha	will	defeat	Arjuna
one	 day.	 Pranaam,	 Guru.	 I	 am	 sorry	 to	 have	 wasted	 your	 valuable	 time.”
Sushala	turned	sharply,	dragging	her	son	behind	her.
The	 chariot	 which	 had	 been	 waiting	 at	 a	 distance,	 rumbled	 towards	 her	 in	 a
cloud	of	dust.	Without	looking	back	at	the	Guru,	Sushala	climbed	in	and	pulled
her	son	up.	She	asked	the	charioteer	to	take	them	back	to	the	palace.	Suratha’s
skin	 felt	 feverish	 and	 he	 moaned	 with	 pain.	 Sushala	 caressed	 the	 shoulder
where	Kripa	had	hit	him.	The	bruise	had	turned	blue	and	begun	to	swell.	How
dared	the	Guru	hit	a	Prince?	Kripa	got	away	with	everything.	For	generations,
the	 Kuru	 Kings	 had	 allowed	 him	 to	 behave	 with	 no	 respect	 towards	 royalty.
There	was	nothing	she	could	do	about	it,	but	she	vowed	to	show	him	and	the
world	 that	 her	 son	 could	 be	 a	 great	 warrior.	 She	 no	 longer	 wished	 to	 stay	 in
Hastinapura;	 she	 would	 go	 back	 to	 Sindh	 and	 hire	 the	 best	 Guru.	 She	 would
ensure	no	one	called	her	son	a	coward.
The	 chariot	 jerked	 forward	 and	 Suratha	 uttered	 a	 cry.	 Sushala	 slapped	 him
across	 his	 face.	 “Coward!	 Behave	 like	 a	 man.	 Do	 not	 let	 me	 hear	 you	 utter
another	cry,”	she	 said	fiercely,	though	her	heart	broke	when	she	saw	Suratha
moving	away	from	her	in	fear.	His	lips	trembled	and	a	tear	made	its	way	down
his	cheek.	“Fool!	Don’t	cry	like	a	girl.	You	are	a	Kshatriya;	behave	like	one.”
People	on	the	street	paused	to	look	at	them	but	Sushala	did	not	care.	The	boy
had	curled	up	like	a	centipede	on	the	chariot	floor	and	was	sucking	his	thumb.
As	the	chariot	rushed	past	the	palace	gates,	Sushala	felt	guilty	for	what	she	had
done	to	her	son	and	tried	to	hug	and	comfort	him,	but	he	wriggled	away	and
jumped	 out	 of	 the	 moving	 chariot.	 He	 ran	 off	 calling	 for	 Pitamaha.	 Sushala
snapped	at	the	charioteer	to	stop	and	jumped	out	and	ran	behind	her	son.	Her
anger	was	getting	the	better	of	her.
Suratha	 crashed	 into	 the	 old	 man	 standing	 near	 a	 window	 trying	 to	 read	 a
moth-eaten	 manuscript	 and	 clucking	 his	 tongue	 in	 irritation.	 When	 Bhishma
saw	 that	 it	 was	 his	 great-grand-nephew,	 his	 expression	 changed	 to	 one	 of
affection.	Sobbing,	Suratha	tried	to	tell	him	what	had	happened.
Sushala	 came	 running	 into	 the	 room	 but	 hesitated	 when	 she	 saw	 her	 son
clutching	the	Pitamaha’s	dhoti.	She	bowed	briefly	and	tried	to	grab	hold	of	her
son.

“You	hit	him,	Sushala?”
The	Kuru	Princess	felt	embarrassed,	not	knowing	what	to	say	to	one	she	had
always	been	taught	to	revere	before	all	others.	She	looked	away,	unable	to	face
him.	 Then	 her	 anger	 came	 rushing	 back.	 She	 raised	 her	 head,	 looked	 at
Bhishma	 and	 said,	 “Yes,	 I	 hit	 him.	 He	 is	 a	 shame	 to	 the	 Kuru	 dynasty,	 to
Chandravamsha	itself.”
For	 a	 moment,	 she	 reminded	 Bhishma	 forcefully	 of	 Suyodhana.	 The	 same
pride,	 the	 same	 defiance	 of	 fate.	 Then	 he	 said	 softly,	 “He	 is	 not	 of	 the	 Kuru
dynasty,	Sushala,	but	a	Prince	of	Sindh.”
His	 words	 were	 like	 a	 knife	 in	 Sushala’s	 heart.	 Was	 she	 not	 a	 Kuru?	 But
Pitamaha	was	right,	Suratha	was	Jayadratha’s	son,	and	she	merely	a	visitor	to
her	parents’	home.	She	was	no	longer	a	Kuru	Princess.	Neither	she	nor	her	son
had	 any	 claim	 on	 the	 great	 dynasty	 of	 Bharata.	 She	 was	 just	 the	 Queen	 of	 a
petty	vassal	state,	the	wife	of	a	King	who	abducted	the	wife	of	other	men	and
was	 then	 paraded	 with	 his	 head	 shaved.	 She	 did	 not	 want	 to	 remain	 on
Hastinapura	 soil.	 She	 would	 return	 to	 Sindh	 and	 ensure	 her	 son	 began	 a
dynasty	more	illustrious	than	the	Kurus.	She	grabbed	her	son	and	dragged	him
out	 of	 Pitamaha’s	 room.	 The	 terrified	 boy	 paused	 for	 a	 moment,	 hoping
Pitamaha	 would	 save	 him	 from	 his	 mother,	 but	 Bhishma	 stood	 like	 a	 stone
statue,	silent	and	aloof.
“Suratha,	 you	 will	 defeat	 your	 uncle,	 Arjuna,	 one	 day	 and	 rule	 all	 of
Bharatavarsha.	 I	 don’t	 want	 to	 see	 you	 crying	 again,”	 Sushala	 said,	 dragging
him	through	the	palace	corridors.
The	boy	flinched	when	he	saw	the	amusement	in	the	guards’	faces	even	as	they
bowed;	he	blushed	when	the	maids	whispered	to	each	other,	pointing	at	him.	He
did	not	want	to	go	to	Sindh,	he	wanted	to	remain	in	Hastinapura,	with	Pitamaha
and	his	grandfather,	who	treated	him	to	sweets	and	listened	to	his	little	stories
with	 an	 attention	 no	 one	 else	 gave	 to	 his	 words.	 He	 wanted	 to	 be	 with	 his
grandmother,	who	made	him	laugh	with	the	stories	of	her	father ’s	kingdom	in
the	distant	snow-clad	mountains.
Sushala	was	still	telling	him	how	he	would	fight	Arjuna	one	day.	Suratha	was
scared.	 He	 knew	 his	 uncle	 was	 the	 ferocious	 warrior	 who	 had	 punished	 his

father	 for	 something	 he	 had	 done.	 He	 was	 scared	 to	 go	 to	 Sindh,	 scared	 of
facing	Arjuna	one	day.	If	only	his	mother	would	listen	to	him.
***
“Father!”	Khatotkacha	could	not	believe	his	eyes.	Bhima	had	come	in	search	of
him!	 How	happy	his	mother	would	be!	 And	 it	was	all	 thanks	to	this	dark	and
handsome	man.	Perhaps	he	was	indeed	what	people	said	of	him,	that	he	was	an
avatar	of	Vishnu.	Khatotkacha	fell	at	Krishna’s	feet.
“No,	 my	 child,	 first	 seek	 your	 father ’s	 blessing,”	 Krishna	 said	 to	 the	 young
Rakshasa	prostrate	on	the	ground	before	him.
Khatotkacha	stood	up,	moved	to	where	Bhima	stood	in	complete	silence,	and
bent	to	touch	his	feet.	His	cousin,	Iravan,	watched	from	a	distance.	Until	now,
they	had	both	been	the	unwanted	sons	of	their	fathers,	but	today	everything	had
changed	for	Khatotkacha.	Iravan	felt	hot	tears	sting	his	eyes.
Krishna	 quickly	 explained	 to	 Khatotkacha	 what	 Bhima	 required	 him	 to	 do.
When	 he	 finished,	 Khatotkacha	 looked	 at	 both	 men	 in	 confusion.	 “But	 I	 have
nothing	 against	 Prince	 Duryodhana	 or	 his	 son.	 Why	 should	 I	 spoil	 the
marriage?”
“We	too	do	not	have	anything	against	Lakshmana	Kumara,	son,	but	we	have	to
do	 this	for	two	people	 who	love	each	 other.”	Krishna	 hurriedly	 stepped	in	 to
fill	Bhima’s	silence.
“Father,	is	this	really	what	you	want	me	to	do?”	Khatotkacha	asked.
Bhima	had	not	spoken	a	word	since	they	had	arrived,	merely	standing	beside
Krishna.	Now	he	gave	the	smallest	of	nods.
Khatotkacha	turned	to	Krishna.	“I	will	do	it,	Swami,	for	my	father.”
“You	know	that	if	they	catch	you,	Duryodhana	will	flay	you	alive?”
“I	do	it	for	my	father.	It	is	my	dharma.”	Khatotkacha	wished	with	all	his	heart
that	his	father	would	look	at	him,	but	Bhima’s	face	appeared	to	be	set	in	stone,
his	eyes	gazing	into	the	distance.

“Do	you	wish	to	meet	my	mother?”	Khatotkacha	asked	Bhima.
Krishna	looked	at	Bhima	and	read	the	refusal	there.	He	gently	shook	his	head
at	the	eager	teenager.	For	a	fleeting	moment,	pity	touched	his	heart.
Khatotkacha	 knew	 he	 should	 not	 have	 asked.	 Before	 he	 could	 say	 anything
more,	 Krishna	 and	 Bhima	 had	 turned	 away	 and	 left.	 ‘Father,	 wait!’	 he	 cried
silently.	‘Let	me	show	you	my	aim	with	the	arrows,	my	power	with	the	mace.
Do	 not	 go!’	 The	 words	 never	 left	 his	 lips.	 Silently	 he	 watched	 his	 tall	 father
vanish	like	a	dream.
“You	are	lucky,	cousin,”	Iravan	said,	trying	not	to	sound	jealous.
“We	may	be	untouchables,	Iravan,	but	surely	one	day	our	fathers	will	need	us,”
replied	Khatotkacha.
“Can	I	come	with	you?”
“It	will	be	dangerous.”
“Then	I	should	be	with	you.”
Khatotkacha	 looked	 at	 his	 cousin	 in	 surprise.	 Iravan	 was	 jealous	 but	 that	 was
not	going	to	stop	him	from	risking	his	life.	Khatotkacha	nodded.	His	cousin’s
face	bloomed	into	a	smile	like	a	wild	flower.
Later,	 as	 he	 rode	 towards	 Hastinapura	 in	 the	 dead	 of	 night,	 a	 strange	 fear
gripped	 Khatotkacha.	 Had	 Vasuki	 not	 warned	 them	 against	 interfering	 in	 the
affairs	 of	 the	 Pandavas	 and	 Kauravas?	 He	 reminded	 himself	 that	 his	 dharma
was	not	to	think	about	the	consequences	of	his	actions,	but	merely	to	do	what
his	 father	 wanted.	 They	 rode	 in	 silence	 towards	 Hastinapura’s	 brightly	 lit
palace,	trying	not	to	think	about	the	dangerous	mission	they	had	undertaken.
*****

30		THE	BOY	LOVER
	
SUYODHANA	 HURRIED	 TOWARDS	 THE	 SABHA.	 The	 courtiers	 rose	 as	 he	 walked	 in

with	Bhanumati	and	Lakshmana.	The	Royals	bowed	before	the	elders	and	then
waited	for	the	bridegroom	to	arrive.	The	sounds	of	a	commotion	arose	above
the	 murmuring	 of	 the	 mantras	 and	 every	 head	 turned	 towards	 the	 door.
Balarama	pulled	Kumara	into	the	Sabha,	an	iron	grip	on	his	arm.	The	young
Prince	had	tears	running	down	his	face.
Bhanumati	 tried	 to	 rush	 to	 her	 son	 but	 Suyodhana	 held	 her	 back.	 “Guru
Balarama,	what	is	the	meaning	of	this?”
“You	want	to	know	the	meaning,	Suyodhana?	It	means	I	have	been	a	fool.	My
wife	 was	 against	 this	 marriage,	 my	 brother	 too,	 yet	 I	 went	 against	 them,
thinking	he	was	your	son,	that	I	could	make	amends	for	what	happened	to	you
years	ago.”
“What	has	my	son	done?”	Bhanumati	cried,	tears	in	her	own	eyes.
“Sister,	you	will	not	wish	to	hear	it	in	public.	I	will	explain	later.	Regretfully,
we	must	call	off	this	marriage,”	Krishna	said.
“Enough	 of	 your	 games,	 Krishna.	 You	 want	 to	 call	 off	 the	 marriage	 without
giving	us	a	reason?”	Suyodhana	turned	and	demanded	of	the	younger	Yadava.
“Suyodhana,	my	friend,	did	I	not	say	I	would	tell	you	later,	not	here	in	public?
You	will	regret	it	if	you	insist,	believe	me,”	Krishna	replied,	urging	discretion.
“You	insult	me	and	then	say	you	will	explain	later?	Tell	me	now!”
“Such	things	are	better	spoken	of	in	private,”	Krishna	replied.
“I	know	my	son,	Krishna.	What	is	it	that	he	has	done?”

“Remember	 it	 was	 you	 who	 insisted	 on	 hearing	 this	 publicly.	 Your	 son	 was
found	in	bed	with	a	boy.”
“What?”	 Suyodhana	 stood	 in	 trembling	 disbelief	 before	 rushing	 towards	 his
son,	his	face	red	with	rage.	Bhanumati	grabbed	his	arm	trying	to	stop	him	but
he	 roughly	 pushed	 her	 away.	 He	 slapped	 Kumara,	 leaving	 the	 imprint	 of	 his
fingers	 on	 his	 son’s	 pale	 face.	 “Who	 was	 the	 boy?	 Bring	 him	 to	 me	 now!”
Suyodhana	yelled,	his	voice	shaking	with	anger	and	humiliation.	Soldiers	ran
out	to	search	for	the	culprit.
“Suyodhana,	 just	 listen	 to	 what	 the	 boy	 has	 to	 say	 first.”	 He	 heard	 Bhishma’s
voice	but	shook	his	head.	No,	he	did	not	need	further	elaborations.	Bhanu	was
crying,	Lakshmana	was	pleading.	Enough	said	and	heard.	All	he	wanted	was	to
get	his	hands	around	the	throat	of	his	son’s	lover.	Suyodhana	clenched	his	fists
and	 closed	 his	 eyes.	 How	 his	 vassal	 Kings	 and	 the	 Priests	 would	 laugh	 at	 his
expense.	It	was	a	curse	having	such	a	son!	He	should	have	killed	him	long	ago.
No	 wonder	Kumara	was	 uninterested	in	archery,	no	wonder	he	 was	 afraid	of
weapons,	he	was	just	an	effeminate	queer!	How	was	he	to	entrust	his	empire	to
such	a	son	when	the	time	came?	The	shame	of	it!	All	Bharatavarsha	would	hear
that	Suyodhana	had	such	a	son.
The	Sabha	emptied	quickly.	Suyodhana	could	hear	the	whispers	fading	away.	A
few	 people	 came	 to	 offer	 their	 sympathies	 but	 most	 just	 turned	 away.	 Karna
spoke	conciliatory	words	and	Bhishma	tried	to	chide	him.	Aswathama	said	he
would	 find	 the	 other	 boy.	 Bhanumati	 stood	 in	 silence.	 Suyodhana	 did	 not
understand	a	word	anyone	said.	He	did	not	care.
Soon	he	was	alone	in	the	cavernous	Sabha.	He	vaguely	heard	someone	say	that
the	 other	 boy	 had	 escaped.	 They	 had	 found	 him	 in	 the	 royal	 kitchen.	 After
having	gagged	and	tied	up	six	kitchen	workers,	he	was	devouring	the	wedding
food	 with	 relish.	 It	 was	 almost	 as	 if	 he	 he	 had	 been	 waiting	 for	 someone	 to
discover	him.	When	the	soldiers	arrived,	he	wrecked	the	kitchen,	overturning
vessels,	 toppling	 stoves	 and	 setting	 fire	 to	 the	 structure.	 While	 the	 soldiers
battled	 the	 flames,	 the	 boy	 climbed	 the	 fort	 wall	 like	 a	 monkey	 and
disappeared.	He	had	someone	waiting	for	him	with	a	horse.	The	hunt	for	him
was	on.
“Who	was	he?”	Suyodhana	asked	the	soldier	standing	before	him.

“We	do	not	know,	Sir.	He	was	dark	and	wild-looking,	like	a	Rakshasa.”
“Leave	me!”	His	son	preferred	a	Rakshasa	boy	to	the	beautiful	daughter	of	his
Guru?
The	last	of	the	torches	finally	died.	The	darkness	became	perfect.
*****

31			KIRATHARJUNEEYAM
	
EKALAVYA	 READ	 HIS	 GOD-DAUGHTER’S	letter	again.	Something	about	the	missive

troubled	him.	It	did	not	contain	the	usual	banter	that	always	brought	a	smile	to
his	 lips.	 He	 had	 decided	 not	 to	 attend	 Kumara’s	 marriage,	 preferring	 not	 to
open	 himself	 to	 insult	 again.	 But	 the	 letter	 made	 him	 change	 his	 mind.
Lakshmana	 had	 written	 to	 say	 that	 her	 brother	 was	 marrying	 the	 wrong	 girl,
who	 was	 in	 love	 with	 her	 cousin,	 Abhimanyu.	 What	 worried	 him	 was	 the
footnote.	She	said	someone	was	stalking	her	and	she	was	afraid.	He	had	to	go.
Ekalavya	 started	 for	 Hastinapura	 early	 in	 the	 morning.	 The	 forest	 was	 drier
than	he	could	ever	remember.	He	was	worried	as	he	rode	over	the	rocky	beds
of	the	dry	mountain	streams.	Why	was	his	manasaputri	Lakshmana	afraid?	His
horse	became	restless.	It	raised	its	head	and	sniffed	the	air,	ears	pointed	ahead.
Something	 had	 stirred	 in	 the	 bush	 ahead,	 perhaps	 a	 wild	 boar.	 Nothing	 was
more	 dangerous	 than	 standing	 in	 the	 way	 of	 a	 charging	 boar.	 Ekalavya
prodded	his	horse	to	move	sideways	and	alighted	behind	a	tree.
The	bush	ahead	shook	and	then	fell	silent	again.	Ekalavya	cautiously	took	his
bow	from	his	shoulder	and	placed	an	arrow.	A	man	suddenly	appeared	to	his
right,	walking	straight	towards	the	bush.	Fool!	Could	he	not	read	the	signs	of
the	forest?	The	stranger	was	carrying	a	bow	and	a	quiver	of	arrows.	He	wore	a
sword	at	his	waist.	But	would	he	have	the	time	to	use	the	weapons?	Perhaps	he
was	 an	 out-of-work	 soldier,	 thought	 the	 Nishada,	 fed	 up	 with	 fools	 from	 the
cities	wandering	around	in	the	forest	as	if	the	jungle	was	a	picnic	spot.	It	was
one	of	the	worst	droughts	in	living	memory	and	the	beasts	were	desperate	for
food	and	water.
Ekalavya	 wanted	 to	 cry	 out	 a	 warning	 but	 that	 might	 have	 provoked	 the	 wild
boar	 to	 charge.	 The	 bush	 stirred	 once	 more	 and	 the	 stranger	 stopped	 in	 his
tracks.	The	boar	charged	with	a	grunt	and	Ekalavya	let	go	his	arrow.	He	was
sure	his	arrow	had	found	its	mark	from	the	squeal	of	the	boar	but	that	fool	had

to	be	pushed	away	from	the	beast’s	path.	Wild	boars	were	ferocious	creatures.
Even	 if	 he	 had	 hit	 his	 mark,	 the	 boar	 would	 still	 charge	 before	 succumbing.
Ekalavya	 screamed	 to	 the	 stranger	 to	 move	 away	 and	 rushed	 to	 pull	 the	 man
off	the	path.	Then	he	saw	the	boar	lying	dead	at	the	stranger ’s	feet.
“Fool!	 What	 are	 you	 gaping	 at?	 But	 for	 my	 arrow,	 your	 intestines	 would	 be
lying	on	the	earth	now.”
The	 man	 stared	 at	 the	 Nishada,	 then	 knelt	 on	 the	 ground	 and	 turned	 the	 boar
over.	Ekalavya	was	shocked.	He	had	expected	to	see	his	arrow	embedded	in	the
boar ’s	throat,	instead,	there	were	two	–	a	hair ’s	breadth	apart.	Who	had	shot	the
second	arrow?	Who	could	shoot	that	well?
“Shooting	 dead	 beasts	 and	 then	 putting	 on	 airs,	 Kirata?”	 The	 man	 asked,
pulling	out	his	arrow	from	the	still	body	of	the	beast.
Arjuna!	 No	 wonder	 Ekalavya	 had	 not	 even	 see	 him	 shoot.	 But	 how	 dared	 he
come	into	his	forest	lands	and	then	abuse	him?	“Have	some	gratitude,	Pandava.
If	not	for	my	arrow...”
“The	day	Arjuna	has	to	depend	on	a	Kirata	to	save	him	from	a	small	beast	is
the	day	he	should	die,”	Arjuna	said	with	disdain	as	he	wiped	the	arrowhead	in
the	grass.	“Kirata,	take	your	arrow	and	begone.	You	may	even	take	the	boar	I
shot	as	a	reward	for	your	labour.”
“Apologize	for	those	words,	or	die!”	Ekalavya	hissed,	his	sword	pressing	hard
against	Arjuna’s	neck.
With	one	swift	movement	Arjuna	pierced	the	Nishada’s	foot	with	the	arrow	tip
he	 was	 holding.	 Ekalavya	 yelled	 in	 pain.	 Arjuna	 stepped	 away,	 his	 bow
gleaming	in	his	hands,	his	eyes	mocking	the	Nishada,	daring	him	to	fight.
Ekalavya	gritted	his	teeth	to	ward	off	the	pain	and	cursed	Arjuna.	His	left	foot
was	bleeding	but	that	was	not	going	to	stop	him.	He	would	have	preferred	this
encounter	to	have	taken	place	in	front	of	all	the	nobles	and	great	men	who	had
treated	 him	 like	 an	 irksome	 insect.	 Over	 two	 decades	 of	 rivalry	 had	 to	 be
settled	 today.	 Arjuna	 had	 not	 recognized	 him,	 Ekalavya	 thought	 with	 a	 bitter
smile.	But	he	would	tell	him	before	he	killed	him.	By	Shiva,	he	was	going	to

finish	the	arrogant	Pandava	today!	Ekalavya	put	his	sword	down	and	picked	up
his	bow.	He	stood	poised	to	meet	Arjuna.
Before	he	could	blink,	an	arrow	swished	past	his	throat.	“The	next	shot	will	not
be	so	merciful,”	Arjuna	told	him.
Ekalavya	 replied	 with	 three	 arrows	 in	 succession.	 The	 first	 broke	 Arjuna’s
bow,	 and	 the	 other	 two	 pierced	 each	 of	 Arjuna’s	 shoulders.	 “The	 next	 one	 is
for	your	black	heart,”	the	Nishada	mocked.
Arjuna	 pulled	 the	 arrows	 out	 and	 threw	 them	 to	 the	 earth.	 He	 unsheathed	 his
sword	and	pointed	it	at	the	Nishada.	Ekalavya	flung	his	bow	down	and	grabbed
his	sword.	‘Gods	of	the	forests,	be	my	witness,’	he	whispered	and	charged	at
Arjuna.
The	swords	clashed	with	great	force,	each	man	determined	to	kill	his	opponent.
Both	men	fought	in	deadly	silence	but	the	trees	around	them	rang	with	agitated
bird	cries.	Sparks	flew	from	their	swords	and	the	parched	grass	beneath	their
feet	began	to	smoke.
It	 was	 difficult	 holding	 the	 sword	 with	 four	 fingers.	 Ekalavya’s	 ghost	 thumb
hurt	 but	 he	 would	 not	 give	 up.	 Not	 to	 Arjuna.	 That	 burning	 smell.	 Ekalavya
knew	what	was	 coming.	Soon	the	dry	scrub	 would	be	 crackling	with	fire.	He
had	to	settle	this	quickly;	a	moment’s	loss	of	concentration	would	end	his	life.
His	horse	neighed	in	fear	as	a	tree	fell	with	a	loud	crash.	Unmindful,	the	two
warriors	fought	on.	The	heat	became	unbearable.	Thick	smoke	enveloped	them
and	they	were	soon	choking	and	coughing	for	breath.
In	a	quirk	of	fate,	Arjuna	stumbled	on	a	dry	root	and	fell	on	his	back.	Ekalavya
kicked	 away	 Arjuna’s	 sword	 and	 placed	 a	 foot	 on	 his	 chest.	 It	 was	 over.	 He
raised	 the	 sword	 high	 over	 his	 head	 with	 both	 hands.	 But	 Arjuna	 needed	 to
know	who	had	defeated	him	before	he	died.
“Do	 you	 know	 who	 I	 am?”	 Ekalavya	 pressed	 his	 foot	 down	 hard,	 pinning
Arjuna	to	the	ground.
Arjuna	was	choking.	“I	know...”
The	 forest	 echoed	 with	 Ekalavya’s	 laughter.	 It	 was	 enough.	 His	 victory	 was

complete.	Yet	he	wanted	to	hear	it	from	Arjuna’s	mouth.	“Tell	me	who	I	am,”
he	said,	leaning	over	Arjuna,	his	sword	raised.
“You	are	Lord	Shiva.”
“Shiva!	Do	I	look	like	Lord	Shiva	to	you?”	Ekalavya	demanded,	more	amused
than	angry.
“No	untouchable	can	defeat	a	Kshatriya.	You	are	none	other	than	Lord	Shiva,
the	greatest	of	all	Gods,”	Arjuna	mumbled.
“Does	 this	 remind	 you	 of	 something?”	 Ekalavya	 said,	 thrusting	 his	 hand	 in
Arjuna’s	face.
As	 Arjuna	 stared	 at	 the	 four	 fingers,	 all	 colour	 drained	 from	 his	 face.	 He
turned	his	head	away	away	and	mumbled,	“You	are	Shiva.	You	are	Shiva.”
There	was	no	point	in	killing	Arjuna	in	the	wilderness	with	no	witnesses.	The
world	 would	 never	 know	 that	 a	 Nishada	 had	 defeated	 the	 greatest	 of	 all
Kshatriyas	in	a	fair	fight.	Arjuna’s	punishment	would	be	the	knowledge	that	a
Nishada	had	defeated	him	–	a	Nishada	without	a	thumb!
“No	Kirata	can	defeat	me,”	Arjuna	mumbled	again.
Ekalavya	took	his	foot	off	Arjuna’s	chest.	“You	are	right.	I	am	Shiva.	Who	is
not	Shiva?	What	boon	shall	I	bestow	upon	you?”
Arjuna	sat	up,	burning	with	shame	at	the	insult.	Fire	was	raging	inside	him	as
much	as	it	was	around	him	in	the	forest.	“Give	me	your	bow.”	His	voice	was
barely	audible.
“You	 think	 I	 won	 because	 there	 is	 some	 magic	 in	 my	 bow?	 You	 can	 accept
magic	 but	 not	 a	 Nishada	 getting	 the	 better	 of	 you,	 Arjuna?	 Here,	 take	 it,	 the
bow	 is	 yours.	 Consider	 it	 the	 divine	 bow	 of	 Shiva,	 Pashupatha	 itself.	 Take	 it
and	 get	 out	 of	 my	 forest!”	 Ekalavya	 said	 with	 disdain	 as	 he	 threw	 the	 bow	 at
Arjuna’s	feet.
He	 laughed	 as	 the	 Pandava	 stooped	 to	 pick	 it	 up.	 Ekalavya	 raised	 his	 hand	 in
mock	blessing.	For	a	brief	moment	Arjuna’s	eyes	lingered	on	the	four	fingers

and	the	non-existent	thumb,	then	he	walked	away	through	the	smoke,	carrying
Ekalavya’s	bow.
As	 he	 watched	 Arjuna’s	 fading	 figure,	 the	 elation	 Ekalavya	 felt	 was
overwhelming.	 This	 was	 the	 moment	 he	 had	 lived	 for.	 He	 had	 finally	 beaten
Arjuna,	 the	 great	 Pandava!	 Arjuna,	 the	 favourite	 of	 Guru	 Drona!	 An
untouchable	had	achieved	the	impossible.	Perhaps	Arjuna	was	right	and	he	was
no	ordinary	mortal.	He	was	Shiva,	the	God	of	Gods.	Despite	himself,	his	feet
started	moving.	The	forest	fire	raged	around	him.	He	could	hear	the	beat	of	a
dumru	and	feel	the	flames	on	his	body.	‘I	am	the	Creator,	I	am	the	Preserver,
and	I	am	the	Destroyer.	I	am	SHIVA..’	The	Nishada	danced	the	tandav	as	if	the
end	of	the	world	was	at	hand.
In	 the	 palace	 Lakshmana	 waited	 for	 Ekalavya	 to	 come,	 while	 evil	 eyes
devoured	her	youth	and	beauty.
*****

32			THE	STALKER
	
WHY	WOULD	HER	FATHER	NOT	LISTEN ?	Lakshmana	had	tried	speaking	to	him	as	he

sat	alone	in	the	Sabha,	but	Suyodhana	had	ordered	her	away.	She	had	run	out
stifling	a	sob.	He	had	never	behaved	with	her	in	that	manner	before.	But	he	had
to	 know	 the	 truth.	 Perhaps	 it	 would	 be	 better	 to	 wait	 until	 morning	 when	 his
anger	would	have	cooled.	Then	she	would	explain	everything.	Her	brother	was
innocent;	he	was	being	framed.
Lakshmana	and	her	mother	had	dragged	Lakshmana	Kumara	to	his	room.	His
cheek	was	still	bleeding	from	the	slap	he	had	received	from	their	father.	How
could	 Suyodhana	 be	 so	 cruel?	 Kumara	 was	 reluctant	 to	 talk.	 It	 took	 a	 lot	 of
cajoling	for	him	to	open	up.
That	evening,	when	everyone	was	at	their	prayers,	Abhimanyu	had	whispered
into	Kumara’s	ear	that	Valsala	wished	to	meet	him.	Enamoured	and	besotted,	he
had	gone	to	the	tryst.	He	found	her	in	a	playful	mood	and	she	had	invited	him
into	 her	 room.	 Once	 he	 was	 inside,	 she	 had	 slipped	 out	 and	 locked	 the	 door
from	the	outside.	He	had	shouted	out	to	her	but	had	been	thrown	onto	the	bed
by	 strong	 hands.	 A	 dark	 man	 had	 pinned	 him	 down.	 The	 next	 thing	 he
remembered	 was	 Balarama	 standing	 at	 the	 door	 glaring	 at	 them.	 There	 were
many	 others	 behind	 him.	 The	 man	 who	 had	 pinned	 him	 to	 the	 bed,	 grinned,
planted	 a	 kiss	 on	 both	 his	 cheeks	 and	 then	 jumped	 out	 through	 the	 window.
Despite	Kumara’s	protests,	Balarama	had	dragged	him	to	the	Sabha.
Abhimanyu’s	 betrayal	 wounded	 Kumara	 more	 than	 anything	 else.	 Lakshmana
insisted	they	discuss	it	with	their	father	but	her	brother	would	not	listen.	Why
did	her	father	dislike	Kumara	so	much?	When	she	walked	back	to	her	chamber,
the	night	had	almost	gone.	She	entered	and	threw	her	gold-embroidered	upper
garment	onto	a	chair	and	got	into	bed.	But	sleep	did	not	cast	its	merciful	mantle
over	her	even	when	her	tired	head	touched	her	pillow.	She	tossed	from	side	to
side	in	her	bed.	Why	did	she	suddenly	feel	afraid?	Rising,	she	looked	around

her	 as	 she	 took	 the	 upper	 garment	 from	 the	 chair	 where	 she	 had	 cast	 it,	 and
wrapped	herself	in	it.	Was	someone	watching	her?	She	was	afraid	to	close	her
eyes.	 She	 missed	 her	 godfather,	 Ekalavya.	 Why	 had	 he	 not	 come?	 She	 had
written	to	him	about	her	fears,	yet	he	had	not	come.	Neither	the	Nishada	nor	the
Princess	were	aware	how	grevious	would	prove	the	cost	of	that	delay.
***
Samba	had	been	waiting	in	the	shadows	for	hours	for	the	sweet	little	thing	to
return	to	her	chamber.	He	pressed	further	into	the	shadows	as	he	saw	her	come.
How	 beautiful	 she	 was!	 He	 heard	 her	 tossing	 about	 on	 her	 bed	 and	 waited
impatiently	for	her	to	fall	asleep.	When	the	only	sound	he	heard	was	that	of	the
crickets	 in	 the	 garden,	 he	 tiptoed	 towards	 the	 door,	 making	 sure	 no	 one	 was
around	to	see	him	enter.	He	had	been	stalking	this	girl	from	Dwaraka.	When	he
had	laid	eyes	on	her	a	few	months	ago	at	the	Yadava	palace,	he	had	decided	he
had	to	have	her	at	any	cost.	For	several	days	he	had	followed	her,	his	fantasies
running	 wild,	 his	 eyes	 roving	 over	 her	 beautiful	 body,	 imagining	 her	 in	 his
arms.	 He	 had	 discovered	 that	 she	 was	 the	 daughter	 of	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 of	 a
Northern	territory	and	that	her	father	was	an	evil	but	powerful	man,	according
to	rumours.	Now,	having	seen	the	great	city	of	Hastinapura,	he	realised	she	was
a	 good	 catch	 as	 well.	 Samba	 was	 uninterested	 in	 politics.	 His	 father	 was
considered	to	be	an	avatar	of	Vishnu.	He	chuckled	at	the	thought.	Who	would
dare	challenge	the	son	of	a	God?
Samba	 had	 seen	 Krishna	 entering	 Balarama’s	 room.	 The	 marriage	 had	 been
called	 off	 because	 the	 groom	 preferred	 boys.	 Samba	 felt	 like	 laughing.	 His
father	 would	 even	 now	 be	 in	 his	 uncle’s	 room,	 discussing	 Valsala’s	 future.
Everyone	 knew	 she	 was	 sweet	 on	 his	 cousin,	 Abhimanyu,	 but	 still	 they	 had
wanted	her	to	marry	Suyodhana’s	queer	son.	Politics!	Perhaps	his	uncle	would
permit	 Valsala	 to	 marry	 Abhimanyu	 now.	 Balarama	 had	 to	 save	 face.
Somewhere	in	the	whole	episode	was	his	father ’s	hand.
Krishna	had	become	intolerant	of	late.	There	had	been	no	need	for	Krishna	to
slap	and	shout	at	him	the	night	he	had	casually	groped	this	cute	little	thing.	In
some	corner	of	his	mind,	Samba	feared	his	father ’s	patience	would	snap	one
day	and	there	would	be	hell	to	pay.	But	he	had	worked	out	a	way	to	keep	his
father	in	check.	His	mother,	Jambavati,	was	a	Vanara	woman	of	the	Jamabavan
tribe.	His	father	felt	guilty	that	his	other	wives	did	not	treat	the	Vanara	woman

well.	 Samba	 had	 grown	 up	 watching	 his	 mother	 fight	 bitter	 battles	 with
Krishna’s	 other	 wives.	 They	 called	 her	 monkey-woman	 and	 him	 a	 monkeychild.	His	father	tried	to	compensate	by	being	more	gentle	and	kind	with	them
both.
Samba	grew	up	to	be	wild	and	uncontrollable.	Though	just	twenty,	he	was	an
alcoholic	 and	 indulged	 in	 rampant	 promiscuous	 behaviour.	 When	 charm	 did
not	work,	he	did	not	hesitate	to	use	force.	Few	women	dared	resist	him	because
he	was	as	ruthless	as	he	was	vengeful.	Though	soma	and	excessive	indulgence
had	 started	 taking	 their	 toll	 on	 him,	 he	 had	 inherited	 his	 father ’s	 powerful
physique	and	charm.	He	was	generous	with	money	and	trinkets.	Each	time	he
got	into	trouble,	his	father	bailed	him	out,	hushing	up	the	incident.	Every	time
it	ended	the	same	way,	with	his	father	shouting	and	threatening.	Samba	would
act	 repentant	 and	 beg	 his	 father ’s	 forgiveness.	 His	 mother	 would	 join	 in
pleading	with	Krishna.	If	nothing	else	worked,	his	mother	would	use	her	usual
weapon,	 saying	 Krishna	 was	 being	 cruel	 to	 them	 because	 they	 were	 Vanara.
That	usually	ended	with	his	helpless	father	forgiving	him.
Samba	knew	he	had	to	keep	away	from	his	Uncle	Balarama.	Twice,	the	old	man
had	ordered	him	to	be	whipped	in	public.	He	had	escaped	both	times	because
his	father	had	pleaded	with	the	Yadava	King.	He	was	going	to	take	his	revenge
on	the	old	man	one	day.	For	now,	he	had	no	other	thought	except	that	he	wanted
this	 beautiful	 girl.	 Groping	 her	 mango-shaped	 breast	 had	 only	 served	 to
inflame	his	lust.	Though	she	had	cried	and	made	a	scene,	he	was	sure	she	had
enjoyed	 his	 touch.	 Girls	 were	 like	 that,	 he	 thought,	 creating	 a	 fuss	 when
someone	gave	them	what	they	ached	for.
Samba	 took	 out	 his	 knife	 and	 looked	 around	 again.	 No	 one	 was	 around.
Perfect.	 Without	 a	 sound	 he	 inserted	 the	 knife	 into	 the	 gap	 between	 the	 door
panels.	 He	 had	 to	 work	 the	 bolt	 with	 care	 but	 he	 had	 done	 it	 often	 it	 enough,
with	other	women.	They	would	act	shocked	at	first	but	before	long	they	would
be	enjoying	it	as	much	as	he	did.	Which	woman	could	resist	a	handsome	man
like	him?
Her	perfume	maddened	him.	He	could	imagine	his	hands	all	over	her.	Samba
tried	to	find	the	bolt	with	the	sharp	edge	of	his	knife.	To	his	surprise	the	door
swung	 open	 soundlessly.	 Ah,	 there	 she	 was,	 lying	 on	 the	 bed	 with	 her	 eyes
closed,	 her	 body	 so	 inviting.	 He	 was	 sure	 she	 had	 left	 the	 door	 unlocked	 in

anticipation.	He	knew	women.	He	hoped	whatever	darned	business	Krishna	had
with	his	uncle,	would	keep	him	away	the	whole	night.	Samba	bolted	the	door.
Biting	his	lip	he	walked	towards	Suyodhana’s	daughter.
*****

33			VENGEANCE
	
EKALAVYA	 WAS	 ANNOYED	 AT	 HIMSELF.	He	had	wasted	precious	time	indulging	in

self-congratulation.	Enough	of	playing	God.	His	horse	had	run	away	from	the
forest	 fire	 and	 he	 had	 spent	 half	 a	 day	 searching	 for	 it.	 The	 Nishada	 was
worried	 about	 his	 god-daughter.	 By	 the	 time	 he	 reached	 the	 outskirts	 of
Hastinapura,	his	horse	was	frothing	at	the	mouth	and	on	the	verge	of	collapse.
The	streetlights	were	being	lit	as	he	entered	the	city	gates.
Something	 was	 amiss.	 The	 colourful	 streamers	 and	 festoons	 still	 hung	 in	 the
streets	but	the	sense	of	festivity	was	missing.	The	city	looked	almost	empty.	An
alarming	silence	prevailed.	What	had	happened?	Ekalavya	could	feel	his	heart
thudding	in	his	chest.	People	moved	away	when	they	saw	him	riding	towards
the	palace.	He	tried	asking	a	few	pedestrians	about	the	marriage	of	the	Prince
but	the	answers	he	received	were	vague.	The	marriage	had	been	called	off	for
some	reason	and	the	Yadavas	had	left	for	Dwaraka	a	few	hours	earlier.
As	 Ekalavya	 entered	 the	 fort,	 Karna’s	 chariot	 rattled	 past	 with	 a	 band	 of
soldiers	following.	Ekalavya	called	out	to	him	but	Karna	did	not	stop.	He	and
his	 soldiers	 disappeared	 in	 a	 cloud	 of	 dust.	 Another	 group	 of	 soldiers
appeared,	led	by	Aswathama.	This	time,	Ekalavya	blocked	their	path.
“Get	out	of	my	way,”	Aswathama	shouted,	trying	to	control	his	restive	mount.
“What	 has	 happened?	 Why	 was	 the	 marriage	 called	 off?”	 Ekalavya	 asked	 his
friend.
“You	don’t	know?	Move	away.	Suyodhana’s	daughter	is	missing.”
“What?”
“She	was	last	seen	by	her	mother	and	brother	in	the	early	hours.	We	fear	the
worst.	Perhaps	the	girl	has	eloped	with	her	lover.	Poor	Suyodhana.	Yesterday

his	son	shamed	him	before	the	whole	world,	and	today	it	is	his	daughter.”
“Aswathama,	 don’t	 talk	 such	 nonsense	 about	 my	 Princess!”	 Ekalavya’s	 hands
were	 shaking,	 his	 throat	 felt	 scorched	 and	 dry.	 ‘Oh,	 Shiva!	 I	 have	 failed	 my
daughter.	If	only	I	had	not	squandered	my	time	playing	God.’	With	a	shaking
hand	he	wiped	the	sweat	from	his	brow.	Where	could	she	be?	In	her	letter	she
had	said	someone	was	stalking	her.
“I	have	no	time	to	argue.	Everyone	is	searching	for	her.	It’s	a	scandal.”
“Why	was	the	marriage	called	off?”	Ekalavya	wanted	to	know.
“Apparently	 Suyodhana’s	 son	 prefers	 boys.	 What	 a	 shame!	 And	 now	 his
daughter	is	missing.”
“She	has	not	eloped.	Someone	was	stalking	her.”
“What?	 Why	 didn’t	 she	 tell	 her	 father?	 Who	 could	 kidnap	 her	 from	 the
palace?”
“I	got	a	letter	yesterday.	She	wrote	it	at	least	three	or	four	days	before	but	only
sent	it	when	the	Yadavas	arrived.	Now	we	know	where	to	look	for	her.”
“If	 it	 was	 indeed	 a	 Yadava,	 then	 it	 isn’t	 going	 to	 be	 easy	 rescuing	 her.	 She
might	have	met	him	at	Dwaraka	and	fallen	in	love.	If	we	make	a	mistake,	it	will
mean	battle	with	the	Yadavas,”	Aswathama	warned.
“Battle!	Brahmin,	my	daughter ’s	honour	is	at	stake.	She	has	not	absconded	with
anyone.	You	and	your	politics!	Let	me	go	in	search	of	Lakshmana.	If	I	start	a
war,	so	be	it.	I	will	hunt	down	the	bastard	who	dared	touch	my	daughter.	I	don’t
care	whether	he	is	a	Yadava,	a	Gandharva	or	God.”
Ekalavya	 did	 not	 wait	 to	 hear	 the	 Brahmin’s	 objections.	 He	 had	 to	 drag
whoever	had	harmed	his	Princess	to	Hastinapura	and	then	tear	him	limb	from
limb.	 The	 Nishada	 galloped	 off	 along	 the	 royal	 highway	 towards	 Dwaraka,
hoping	 against	 hope	 that	 he	 was	 not	 too	 late,	 that	 he	 would	 find	 Lakshmana
before	the	devil	had...	no,	he	could	not	bear	to	even	think	about	it.
*****

34 			VANARAPUTRA
	
“FOOL!	DO	YOU	EVEN	KNOW	what	you	have	done?”	Krishna	was	furious.

Samba	chewed	on	a	blade	of	grass	nonchalantly	while	Jambavati	stood	between
her	angry	husband	and	her	unrepentant	son.
“What	is	there	to	be	so	angry	about,	Father?	I	liked	the	girl	so	I	took	her.	Have
you	not	done	the	same	in	your	youth?”	Samba	retorted.
“How	dare	you	speak	to	me	this	way?”
“You	 have	 16,008	 wives	 and	 you	 are	 giving	 me	 advice?”	 Samba	 shook	 with
laughter.
“Samba,	 apologise	 to	 your	 father.	 Beg	 for	 mercy,”	 Jambavati	 said	 quickly
before	Krishna	could	react.
When	 Krishna	 had	 killed	 the	 Narakasura	 years	 before,	 he	 had	 freed	 16,000
women	 from	 the	 harem.	 The	 priests	 had	 ordered	 that,	 as	 widows,	 the	 women
had	 to	 commit	 sati.	 As	 an	 act	 of	 compassion,	 Krishna	 had	 brought	 them	 to
Dwaraka	 to	 save	 them	 from	 such	 a	 horrible	 fate.	 Except	 for	 eight,	 the	 others
were	his	wives	only	in	the	sense	that	he	had	given	them	protection.	How	dared
Samba	use	it	to	justify	his	own	loathsome	actions?
“Jambavati,	move	away.	This	brute	does	not	deserve	to	live.”	Krishna	moved
threateningly	towards	his	son.
Jambavati,	arms	outstretched,	pleaded	with	tears	in	her	eyes.	“Prabhu,	forgive
him.	He	is	your	son.”
“Do	 you	 see	 any	 remorse	 for	 what	 he	 has	 done,	 Jambavati?	 He	 has	 no
conscience	or	feelings	of	guilt.	What	have	you	done	with	the	girl?”

“Oh,	I	left	her	in	the	forest.	I	had	a	good	time.	When	I	left,	she	was	feigning
sleep.	Don’t	I	know	these	girls…”	Samba	said	with	a	leer.
“Fool!	Do	you	think	Duryodhana	will	remain	silent?	Do	you	think	your	Uncle
Balarama	will	let	you	go	free?	If	my	brother	decides	to	behead	you,	I	will	be
there	 to	 cheer	 him	 on.	 Jambavati,	 stop	 bawling.	 I	 must	 kill	 this	 viper.”	 So
saying,	Krishna	whipped	out	his	disc.
“You	 do	what	you	must,	Prabhu.	Behead	him	with	your	own	hands.	After	all,
we	 are	 mere	 Vanaras.	 It	 is	 my	 fate	 that	 my	 husband	 is	 going	 to	 kill	 our	 only
son.	Kill	me	too,	Prabhu,”	Jambavati	cried.
Krishna	 watched	 helplessly	 as	 his	 wife	 beat	 her	 breasts	 and	 wailed	 in	 a	 loud
voice.	His	other	wives	stood	at	the	door,	agog	with	curiosity.	Krishna	burned
with	shame	at	this	public	humiliation.	His	son	would	certainly	bring	death	and
disaster	 to	 the	 tribe.	 Samba	 had	 manipulated	 him	 again.	 Oh,	 the	 indignity	 of
falling	 at	 Duryodhana’s	 feet,	 thought	 Krishna.	 What	 had	 he	 done	 to	 deserve
such	a	son?
“Your	son	has	only	one	way	to	save	his	head,”	Krishna	said,	his	voice	faltering
as	he	saw	the	smile	on	his	son’s	lips.	“He	must	marry	Duryodhana’s	daughter.”
“Why,	when	I	have	already	enjoyed	her?”
Krishna	 pushed	 away	 Jambavati’s	 restraining	 arms	 and	 caught	 Samba	 by	 the
neck.	 The	 youngster	 was	 no	 match	 for	 his	 father.	 Krishna	 pressed	 the	 sharp
edge	 of	 his	 disc	 on	 his	 son’s	 throat	 and	 hissed,	 “You	 are	 worse	 than	 any
Rakshasa	I	have	ever	slain.”
At	last	Samba’s	eyes	went	wide	with	fear.	“Forgive	me,	Father.	I	will	do	as	you
say.	 I	 will	 marry	 her.	 Save	 me	 from	 my	 Uncle	 Balarama	 and	 Prince
Duryodhana.	I	will	obey	you,	Father.”
His	son	was	quaking	in	fear.	Coward!	Disgusted,	Krishna	threw	Samba	to	the
floor.	 He	 grabbed	his	 father ’s	 legs,	 weeping.	 Jambavati	fell	at	Krishna’s	feet,
pleading	for	her	son’s	life.	Finally,	Krishna’s	clenched	fist	relaxed.	He	curtly
told	mother	and	 son	to	 rise	 from	 the	floor	and	 stop	their	wailing.	 He	 had	no
idea	how	he	would	avoid	a	conflict	with	Duryodhana.	This	was	not	the	time	for

battle,	 not	 with	 the	 Pandavas	 away.	 He	 would	 lose	 face	 by	 begging
Duryodhana,	but	there	was	no	other	way.
“Stay	 here.	 Let	 me	 talk	 to	 Balarama.”	 With	 a	 heavy	 heart,	 Krishna	 left	 the
chamber.	Had	he	paused	a	moment	to	listen,	he	could	perhaps	have	saved	the
Yadavas	and	their	city	from	total	annihilation.
The	moment	Krishna	left,	Samba	said	to	his	mother,	“My	father	and	his	empty
threats!	 Why	 should	 I	 marry	 that	 girl?	 What	 wrong	 have	 I	 done?	 She	 was
asking	for	it...	the	way	she	dressed,	the	way	she	danced...	I	will	stay	away	from
him	for	a	few	days.	Send	me	word	when	his	anger	subsides.”
Samba	vanished	into	the	night	without	waiting	for	his	mother ’s	reply.
*****

35			THE	WRETCHED
	
PAIN.	SHE	COULD	 SMELL	 BLOOD,	smell	the	dryness	of	the	earth	on	which	she	lay.

She	could	smell	him	on	her	and	gagged.	It	hurt	where	he	had	hit	her.	She	bit
her	swollen	lips	and	moaned.	Her	tears	had	dried	up	long	ago.	She	heard	the
sound	 of	 hooves	 getting	 closer.	 Someone	 was	 coming	 in	 search	 of	 her.	 She
wanted	 to	 crawl	 behind	 the	 nearest	 bush	 and	 die	 there.	 She	 tried	 to	 get	 up,	 to
cover	 her	 shame	 with	 her	 hands,	 and	 drag	 herself	 from	 the	 world’s
unforgiving	gaze.	‘No	one	should	see	me	like	this,’	Lakshmana	whimpered.	‘I
want	to	die.	I	want	to	die	before	anyone	gets	here	and	sees	my	shame.’
Someone	covered	her	with	a	shawl.	She	seized	it,	covering	even	her	fingertips.
Karna’s	face	was	set	in	a	grim	mask	as	he	lifted	up	her	shuddering	body.	‘Oh,
he	 knows	 I	 am	 dirty,’	 Lakshmana	 sobbed	 silently	 as	 she	 buried	 her	 face	 in
Karna’s	 chest.	 The	 cold	 touch	 of	 his	 armour	 was	 somehow	 soothing.	 He
lowered	 her	 onto	 the	 chariot	 floor	 and	 she	 lay	 there,	 coiled	 into	 a	 ball.
Thankfully,	 he	 did	 not	 ask	 any	 questions.	 The	 chariot	 turned	 towards
Hastinapura.	How	would	she	ever	face	her	parents,	her	brother,	the	world?
When	the	chariot	finally	slowed	and	halted,	Lakshmana	heard	a	familiar	voice.
Uncle	 Ekalavya!	 Her	 heart	 leapt	 joyfully	 before	 sorrow	 overwhelmed	 her
again.	How	could	she	even	look	at	him?
There	was	a	brief	argument	between	Karna	and	Ekalavya.	Lakshmana	trembled
when	 a	 hand	 touched	 her	 shoulder.	 “My	 Princess...forgive	 me...”	 Ekalavya’s
voice	was	hoarse	with	pain.
Lakshmana’s	tears	broke	like	a	summer	flood.	“You	are	too	late.”
Then	came	the	question	she	feared	the	most.	“Who	did	this	to	you?”
The	name	was	cursed!	But	Ekalavya	would	not	leave	her	alone.	He	put	his	arm
around	her	shoulder	gently	and	lifted	her	chin	with	his	other	hand.	“Princess…

tell	me	who	did	this	to	you.”
Lakshmana	looked	away	and	whispered,	“Samba,	son	of	Krishna.”
Ekalavya	stood	up	and	drew	his	sword.	Through	her	sobs	she	could	just	hear
him	say,	“Princess,	you	will	have	him	before	sunrise.”	And	he	was	gone.
‘Don’t	go!	Do	not	leave	me	alone!’	Her	plea	remained	unspoken,	except	in	her
aching	heart.
The	 chariot	 started	 moving	 again,	 travelling	 towards	 her	 father ’s	 palace.
Lakshmana	 murmured	 a	 prayer.	 Ekalavya	 had	 gone	 in	 search	 of	 Krishna’s
rogue	 son.	 She	 was	 afraid	 to	 even	 think	 of	 the	 consequences,	 whether	 he
succeeded	or	failed.	She	chewed	on	the	fringe	of	her	shawl,	her	hands	shaking
as	if	she	were	afflicted	with	palsy.	‘Oh,	Shiva,	let	me	die!’	Lakshmana	shut	her
eyes,	trying	to	shake	off	the	image	of	the	leering	Samba	from	her	mind.	She
tried	not	to	imagine	what	awaited	Ekalavya	as	he	galloped	towards	Dwaraka.
Why	had	the	chariot	stopped?	A	blood-chilling	howl	filled	the	air.	It	rose	and
ebbed	 and	 then	 rose	 again.	 Terrified,	 Lakshmana	 opened	 her	 eyes.	 A	 beggar
was	dragging	a	dog	from	their	path.	Karna	held	the	reins	and	waited,	trying	not
to	let	the	compassion	he	felt	overcome	him.	But	even	as	the	chariot	drove	on,
leaving	 the	 beggar	 and	 his	 dog	 far	 behind,	 the	 agonised	 howling	 refused	 to
fade	away.
*****

36			RETRIBUTION
	
A	 MAN	 SNEAKED	 OUT,	 LOOKED	 AROUND	 furtively,	 and	 then	 darted	 towards	 the

shelter	of	the	trees.	Perhaps	a	deserter,	thought	Ekalavya.	The	man	could	lead
him	to	Samba.	He	walked	forward	noiselessly	and	crouched	behind	a	bush,	as
silent	as	a	big	cat	stalking	its	prey.	A	bat	whizzed	past	his	head	screeching	but	it
did	 not	 disturb	 the	 man	 of	 the	 forest.	 Noiselessly,	 Ekalavya	 pounced	 on	 the
man,	pinning	him	to	the	ground.	The	man	uttered	a	profanity.	Ekalavya	hit	him
across	the	face	and	waited.	When	the	coughing	and	whining	stopped,	the	man
muttered	something	and	Ekalavya	bent	to	hear.
“You...untouchable...you	do	not	know	who	you	are	playing	with...”
This	was	no	ordinary	soldier.	“Who	are	you?”	Ekalavya	hissed.
“You	Nishada,	you	don’t	know	who	I	am?	I	am	the	son	of	Krishna...	You	will
pay	for	this.”
Samba!	 Ekalavya	 punched	 him	 with	 all	 his	 strength,	 flattening	 his	 nose.	 He
waited	till	Samba’s	screams	faded	to	a	whimper	and	then	punched	him	again,
knocking	out	a	few	teeth.	“Father...father...help	me...”	Samba	whined.	Ekalavya
waited.
Some	soldiers	were	animatedly	pointing	towards	the	woods.	Ekalavya	knew	he
did	 not	 have	 much	 time	 but	 he	 was	 determined	 the	 scoundrel	 would	 not	 have
the	good	fortune	to	die	a	quick	death.	First	he	would	drag	this	stinking	monster
before	 the	 Hastinapura	 Sabha	 and	 show	 them	 what	 a	 Nishada	 could	 do	 while
they,	the	Kshatriyas,	still	sat	debating	the	rights	and	the	wrongs.	Then	he	would
kill	Samba,	inch	by	inch.
“Help!”	Samba	cried	as	another	man	emerged	from	the	Yadava	camp.
Ekalavya’s	 heart	 skipped	 a	 beat.	 Krishna!	 Another	 tall	 man	 came	 out	 and	 the

two	 men	 began	 to	 argue.	 Samba	 tried	 to	 cry	 out	 but	 Ekalavya	 clamped	 his
mouth	shut.	He	tore	a	piece	from	his	shawl	and	shoved	it	into	Samba’s	mouth,
gagging	 him.	 Then	 he	 kicked	 Samba	 in	 the	 ribs	 until	 he	 lost	 consciousness.
Grabbing	Samba’s	long	hair,	Ekalavya	began	dragging	him	towards	his	horse.
“Hey,	you!”	Krishna	roared	and	began	running	towards	the	woods.
There	 was	 no	 time	 to	 lose.	 Ekalavya	 hoisted	 Samba	 upon	 his	 shoulder	 and
staggered	 on.	 Samba	 was	 heavier	 than	 he	 had	 thought.	 He	 whistled	 and	 his
horse	 broke	 through	 the	 undergrowth,	 almost	 knocking	 down	 Krishna.	 The
Yadava	was	quick	to	roll	away,	getting	back	on	his	feet	in	one	swift	movement.
Ekalavya	 dumped	 Samba’s	 unconscious	 form	 on	 his	 horse	 and	 mounted.
Krishna’s	Sudharshana	whistled	past	his	throat,	splintering	a	tree	behind	him.
Ekalavya	kicked	his	horse	and	it	shot	off	like	an	arrow.	Krishna	dived	to	catch
the	fleeing	horse	but	could	not	get	his	hands	to	the	reins.
Ekalavya	galloped	on	towards	Hastinapura	with	his	quarry.	It	was	just	a	matter
of	time	before	the	fearsome	Narayana	Sena	would	give	him	chase.	He	kept	his
dagger	 pressed	 to	 the	 unconscious	 Samba’s	 throat.	 When	 the	 Narayana	 Sena
caught	up	with	him,	he	wanted	to	be	sure	to	take	Samba	with	him	to	the	abode
of	Yama.
After	a	while,	Ekalavya	wondered	why	no	arrows	were	whizzing	past	him	and
why	he	did	not	hear	the	rumble	of	chasing	chariots.	His	horse	galloped	but	his
heart	raced	even	faster.	When	he	finally	looked	back,	emptiness	stretched	to	the
horizon.	Where	was	Krishna’s	army?	Somehow,	that	was	even	more	terrifying.
*****
It	 was	 frustrating	 trying	 to	 reason	 with	 Kritavarma.	 Had	 it	 not	 been	 for	 the
adamant	General,	he	would	have	caught	the	Nishada	and	saved	his	son.
“Ekalavya	has	kidnapped	my	son	and	you	stand	here	arguing	with	me?	Do	you
not	know	what	Duryodhana	will	do	when	he	lays	hands	on	Samba?”
“Krishna,	 your	 son	 is	 lucky	 to	 face	 Suyodhana	 and	 not	 me.	 He	 deserves	 a
painful	death,”	Kritavarma	replied	coldly.
The	General	was	right.	For	a	brief	moment	Krishna	thought	it	would	be	better

to	let	the	Nishada	kill	his	son.	Loud	wailing	shook	him	from	his	reverie	as	a
hysterical	 Jambavati	 came	 running	 towards	 him.	 ‘Oh	 Lord	 Brahma!	 Save	 me
from	this	woman,’	Krishna	prayed.
“Prabhu,	you	are	his	father,	the	saviour	of	all...”
Krishna	sighed	wearily.	“Jambavati,	he	is	a	criminal.”
“Would	you	say	the	same	if	it	was	Satyabhama’s	or	Rukmini’s	son?	Samba	is	a
Vanara,	so	nobody	cares	if	he	dies,	not	even	his	father...”
“Enough!”	Krishna	snapped	and	turned	to	the	General.	“I	know,	Kritavarma,	I
know.	 He	 is	 a	 blot	 on	 our	 race,	 but	 he	 is	 still	 my	 son.	 I	 will	 go	 to
Dur...Suyodhana	 and	 beg	 his	 forgiveness.	 I	 will	 ensure	 Samba	 marries
Suyodhana’s	daughter	to	save	her	honour.”
“You’d	better	talk	to	His	Highness,	Balarama.	I	will	not	spill	the	blood	of	my
boys	for	such	an	unworthy	cause.”
Without	a	word	Krishna	walked	towards	his	brother ’s	camp,	to	have	the	most
difficult	conversation	of	his	life.
*****

37			A	DAUGHTER’S	HONOUR
	
WHAT	 MORE	 COULD	 HE	 DO	 to	 set	 these	 Indians	 at	 each	 other ’s	 throats?	 Shakuni

had	 hoped	 that	 an	 all-out	 war	 would	 break	 out	 between	 Hastinapura	 and
Dwaraka.	 He	 had	 assiduously	 fanned	 the	 flames	 of	 revenge	 in	 Suyodhana’s
mind	and	the	imperial	army	was	getting	ready	to	march	towards	Dwaraka.	He
had	arranged	for	a	few	spies	to	incite	trouble	in	the	South.	Even	now,	they	were
spreading	 rumours	 that	 Suyodhana	 had	 turned	 against	 Krishna.	 His	 mission
was	drawing	to	a	glorious	conclusion	when	that	cursed	Nishada	had	dragged	in
Krishna’s	loutish	son.	That	had	ruined	everything.
‘Indians	 sit	 and	 argue	 without	 end	 but	 do	 nothing,	 not	 even	 when	 their
daughters	 are	 raped.	 Weaklings!’	 thought	 Shakuni	 in	 disgust.	 Bhishma	 had
called	back	the	army	as	soon	as	Ekalavya	had	arrived	with	Samba.	Suyodhana
wanted	to	behead	Krishna’s	son	but	the	timely	arrival	of	Balarama’s	messenger
seeking	 an	 audience	 had	 saved	 him.	 After	 a	 long	 debate,	 they	 had	 decided	 to
throw	Samba	into	a	dungeon	and	Suyodhana	agreed	to	meet	Balarama.
Shakuni	watched	in	exasperation	as	Balarama	and	Krishna	begged	the	Crown
Prince’s	forgiveness.	Bhanumati	tried	to	persuade	her	husband	to	make	Samba
marry	 their	 daughter.	 The	 chances	 of	 war	 faded.	 Ekalavya	 rushed	 out	 of	 the
Sabha	 in	 protest	 but	 he	 was	 ignored.	 A	 Nishada	 had	 little	 voice	 after	 all.
Following	 protracted	 discussions,	 they	 decided	 that	 Samba	 should	 marry
Lakshmana	 to	 save	 her	 honour.	 Shakuni	 almost	 threw	 the	 dice	 he	 held	 to	 the
floor	in	frustration	and	anger.	In	his	homeland,	no	rapist	would	have	got	away
by	agreeing	 to	 marry	the	girl	he	had	 violated.	The	men	here	would	not	fight
even	when	their	wives	were	disrobed	in	public	or	their	daughters	raped.
Such	shameless	behaviour	by	spineless	men!	How	was	he	to	fulfill	the	oath	he
had	 taken	 to	 destroy	 India	 if	 her	 men	 refused	 to	 fight,	 even	 for	 honour?	 His
hopes	 rose	 when	 Suyodhana	 said	 he	 would	 consider	 the	 marriage	 only	 if	 his
daughter	agreed.	Lakshmana	would	never	agree;	he	was	certain	of	it.

When	 they	 brought	 Lakshmana	 into	 the	 Sabha,	 her	 face	 was	 covered	 with	 a
veil,	as	if	she	was	the	one	at	fault	and	had	to	be	hidden	from	the	world.
Balarama	clasped	her	hands	saying,	“Daughter,	what	we	ask	of	you	is	perhaps
more	than	any	human	should	be	asked	to	do,	but	can	you	find	it	in	your	heart	to
forgive	my	nephew?”
Hot	 tears	 dropped	 from	 Lakshmana’s	 downcast	 lashes	 and	 traced	 their	 path
over	her	once	flawless	face.	She	shook	her	head.	There	was	a	collective	gasp
of	horror.	That	meant	war.	Shakuni	would	have	liked	to	clap	in	approbation	but
kept	his	glee	to	himself.
Balarama	spoke	again.	“Daughter,	I	know	my	nephew	is	unworthy	of	you,	or
indeed	of	any	woman.	I	ask	this	as	a	sacrifice	from	you,	for	all	those	women
who	would	inevitably	be	widowed	by	another	battle,	the	children	who	would	be
left	 fatherless.	 Daughter,	 consider	 what	 your	 decision	 will	 mean	 to	 so	 many
innocent	people.”
Lakshmana’s	mind	seethed	with	anger.	Was	she	now	to	be	handed	to	that	brute
like	a	sacrificial	lamb,	even	after	all	he	had	done?	Was	there	no	one	who	would
take	her	side?	Suddenly,	she	remembered	what	she	had	heard	about	Draupadi
being	 dragged	 to	 the	 Sabha.	 These	 were	 the	 same	 men,	 were	 they	 not?	 She
shook	her	head	again.
Krishna	 stepped	 forward.	 He	 stood	 before	 Lakshmana,	 his	 hands	 folded	 in
supplication.	“Princess,	you	have	the	power	to	prevent	so	many	from	deaths.”
Lakshmana	 finally	 raised	 her	 head	 and	 stared	 at	 Krishna.	 How	 handsome	 she
had	once	thought	him	to	be.	Unable	to	look	into	those	beautiful,	tear-drenched
eyes,	Krishna	looked	away.	Youth,	laughter	and	life	died	in	Lakshmana	at	that
moment.	‘Better	one	dead	than	thousands,’	she	thought.	Without	taking	her	eyes
from	Krishna’s	face	she	said,	“I	agree.”
Shakuni	 could	 have	 killed	 Krishna	 with	 his	 bare	 hands.	 Blasted	 avatar.	 He
turned	 and	 walked	 out	 of	 the	 Sabha.	 So	 much	 work,	 so	 much	 risk,	 so	 much
planning,	all	for	nothing.	Now	the	only	hope	lay	in	the	Pandavas	returning	and
claiming	 the	 throne.	 If	 only	 Durjaya	 had	 been	 a	 free	 man.	 He	 saw	 Ekalavya
sitting	in	a	corner	of	the	palace	garden,	his	head	buried	in	his	hands.	Perhaps

the	Nishada	could	be	of	some	help,	thought	Shakuni,	and	went	over	to	him.
“Nauseating.	They	are	forcing	the	girl	to	marry	that	bastard.”
“What?”	Ekalavya	gasped.	His	muscles	had	gone	rigid.
“Oh,	 they	 have	 compelled	 the	 poor	 girl	 to	 marry	 that	 scoundrel.	 You	 should
have	 heard	 Krishna	 and	 Balarama.	 It	 was	 sickening.	 That	 poor	 child!	 Well,	 I
hope	the	wedding	feast	will	be	sumptuous.”
“Shut	up,	Mlecha!”	Ekalavya	pushed	Shakuni	away	and	began	running	towards
the	palace.
“If	you	want	to	do	something,	I	can	help	you,	Nishada.	I,	too,	am	appalled	by
the	whole	affair,”	Shakuni	shouted	after	him.
Ekalavya	stopped.	Shakuni	hurried	to	his	side.	Looking	at	the	far	horizon,	he
whispered,	“I	know	where	the	villain	is	being	held.”
“What	do	you	mean?”	asked	Ekalavya,	every	sense	alert.
“What	 if	 there	 was	 no	 Samba	 to	 marry	 Lakshmana?”	 suggested	 Shakuni
smoothly.
Ekalavya’s	face	reflected	none	of	the	mad	churning	in	his	brain.	Every	instinct
warned	him	not	to	trust	this	man.
“In	my	country,	we	call	it	‘honour	killing’.	But	here,	people	just	talk.	I	can	only
sympathize	with	the	girl.”
“Where	is	he	held?”	Ekalavya	asked,	his	voice	dangerously	calm.
“There	are	many	guards.	Security	is	tight	and...”
“Where	is	he?”
“Come	with	me,”	Shakuni	said	as	he	hurried	off.
Ekalavya	 followed	 soundlessly.	 Shakuni	 showed	 him	 the	 entrance	 and	 then
quickly	 disappeared,	 hoping	 no	 one	 had	 seen	 them	 together.	 He	 watched

Ekalavya	 move	 silently	 towards	 the	 first	 guard.	 ‘This	 might	 just	 work,’	 he
thought,	but	he	had	to	find	Krishna.	Shakuni	rushed	back	to	the	palace.
***
“This	 is	 an	 inspection.	 Where	 is	 your	 chief?”	 Ekalavya	 barked	 at	 the	 guard.
The	man	ran	off	to	fetch	his	superior.
When	the	Chief	came,	he	eyed	Ekalavya	suspiciously.	He	knew	the	dark	man	to
be	 a	 minor	 King	 so	 he	 bowed,	 but	 his	 right	 hand	 remained	 on	 the	 hilt	 of	 his
sword	 as	 he	 asked,	 “Sir,	 have	 you	 any	 token	 of	 your	 authority	 to	 make	 this
inspection?”
“I	 am	 Ekalavya,	 a	 close	 friend	 of	 the	 Crown	 Prince	 and	 King	 of	 his	 forest
lands,”	 Ekalavya	 answered	 in	 an	 officious	 tone,	 hoping	 the	 man	 would	 not
prove	too	difficult.	He	would	rather	not	have	to	kill	him.
“My	apologies,	Sir.	Please	come	to	my	room.	Leave	your	weapons	outside	–
your	sword,	bows,	quiver,	everything.	It	is	regulation.”
The	Chief	led	Ekalavya	in.	As	soon	as	they	entered,	Ekalavya	bolted	the	door
and	 hit	 the	 Chief	 on	 the	 head	 with	 his	 balled	 fist.	 The	 man	 collapsed	 silently
onto	the	floor.	Ekalavya	waited	for	some	time	to	be	sure	the	Chief	would	not
come	around	soon	and	then	dragged	him	to	his	chair	and	arranged	him	to	look
like	he	was	taking	a	nap.	Then	Ekalavya	went	out	and	closed	the	door,	walking
with	a	confident	gait	and	nodding	to	the	soldiers	on	duty,	who	bowed	to	him.
The	air	was	damp	and	musty.	Large	spiders	lurked	in	the	corners.	Somewhere
bats	 screeched.	 It	 grew	 darker	 as	 he	 walked	 on.	 A	 few	 torches	 threw	 more
smoke	 than	 light	 into	 the	 dungeons.	 It	 was	 the	 most	 feared	 prison	 in
Hastinapura	 and	 housed	 many	 of	 Durjaya’s	 men.	 Prisoners	 with	 long	 dirty
beards	screamed	when	Ekalavya	passed,	rattling	their	chains	and	the	iron	bars.
The	guards	tried	to	silence	them	by	hitting	the	bars	with	long	sticks.
Where	was	Samba?	Ekalavya	knew	he	could	not	ask	without	raising	suspicion.
He	 did	 not	 have	 much	 time.	 Shakuni	 was	 sure	 to	 be	 back.	 He	 had	 to	 find	 that
monster	and	kill	him	before	someone	came	to	fetch	the	bridegroom.	The	word
tasted	like	mud	in	his	mouth	–	bridegroom	indeed!	‘Princess,	I	will	never	let
him	touch	you	again,’	Ekalavya	vowed	as	he	descended	further	into	the	bowels

of	the	earth.
The	air	became	damper	and	the	ground	uneven,	littered	with	pebbles	and	rocks.
It	was	the	deepest	chamber,	where	hardened	criminals	were	held.	Ekalavya	felt
vulnerable	 without	 his	 weapons	 but	 his	 rage	 was	 as	 sharp	 as	 any	 sword.	 He
turned	another	corner	and	in	the	dim	light	of	a	guttering	torch,	he	saw	Samba
talking	to	the	prisoner	in	the	opposite	cell.	Durjaya!	Perhaps	it	was	the	day	for
two	murders.
In	an	authoritative	voice	he	commanded	the	guards	to	move	away.	Samba	fell
silent,	the	blood	draining	from	his	face.	In	the	smoky,	flickering	light	Ekalavya
walked	towards	Samba’s	cell	with	the	finality	of	death.
*****

38			DEATH	IN	THE	DARK
	
“WHAT	 DO	 YOU	 WANT	 NOW?”	 Gandhari	 asked	her	brother,	her	face	turned	away

from	the	doorway	where	he	stood.
“Sister,	I	need	only	a	moment.	I	need	the	King’s	permission	to	free	Samba.	It
looks	awkward	keeping	the	bridegroom	in	prison.”
“Stay	out	of	what	does	not	concern	you,	Shakuni,”	said	Gandhari,	an	edge	to
her	voice.
“Shakuni,	 your	 sister	 has	 some	 fancy	 ideas	 about	 statecraft,”	 said
Dhritarashtra,	getting	up	from	the	chair	he	had	been	sitting	in.	“I	am	delighted
we	 now	 have	 Krishna	 on	 our	 side.	 That	 was	 a	 brilliant	 move	 by	 Suyodhana.
Go,	free	Krishna’s	son.	We	cannot	appear	disrespectful.	Ring	the	bell,	Shakuni,
and	call	for	my	seal.”
“I	have	the	order	ready,	brother.”	He	turned	to	a	guard	and	ordered	the	royal
seal	to	be	brought	in.
Dhritarashtra	asked	Shakuni	to	read	the	document	and	then	affixed	his	seal	at
the	end,	his	face	a	blend	of	pleasure	and	pathos.	Shakuni	knew	his	brother-inlaw	was	not	what	he	appeared	to	be;	he	was	unpredictable	at	best.	Clutching	the
royal	order,	Shakuni	hurried	out.	If	things	went	as	planned,	he	would	trigger	a
war	and	Krishna	would	look	like	the	fool	who	started	it	all.
***
“I	am	honoured,”	Krishna	said	to	Shakuni	in	a	flat	voice,	drumming	his	fingers
on	a	table.
“Here	 is	 the	 royal	 order	 freeing	 your	 son,”	 Shakuni	 responded,	 ignoring
Krishna’s	tone.

“Oh,	let	him	stay	one	more	night	in	the	dungeon.	He	deserves	nothing	better.”
This	was	getting	difficult.	Shakuni	fidgeted	with	the	royal	order.	Precious	time
was	being	lost.	“Sir,	your	son’s	life	is	in	grave	danger.	If	something	happens	to
him	in	prison...”
Krishna	laughed.	“He	is	in	the	most	secure	prison	in	Bharatavarsha.	You	worry
needlessly,	 my	 friend.	 If	 you	 will	 excuse	 me,	 I	 was	 getting	 ready	 to	 visit	 my
Aunt	Kunti.”
“Sir,	it	would	be	better	to	get	your	son	out	of	that	prison	before	it	is	too	late.
The	Nishada	King	who	kidnapped	your	son	is	not	happy	with	the	alliance.”
“Many	 people	 are	 not	 happy	 with	 the	 alliance.	 Can	 we	 afford	 to	 worry	 about
the	opinions	of	the	whole	world?”	retorted	Krishna	with	a	smile.
“Ekalavya	 is	 dangerous.	 He	 hates	 your	 son.	 Prison	 is	 no	 longer	 safe	 for
Samba.	This	order	frees	him.”
Shakuni	knew	he	had	touched	a	chord	by	the	way	Krishna’s	posture	changed.
Without	 waiting,	 he	 turned	 and	 began	 walking	 away.	 Krishna’s	 footsteps
followed	him.	Shakuni	smiled,	the	Yadava	had	taken	the	bait.
When	they	reached	the	prison,	Shakuni	presented	the	order	to	the	Deputy	Chief.
“Where	is	the	Chief?”	Shakuni	asked.	The	Deputy	responded	that	the	Chief	was
taking	a	nap.
“This	 is	 Lord	 Krishna,	 the	 Yadava	 Prince,”	 Shakuni	 said,	 introducing	 his
companion.
Hearing	the	name,	the	Deputy	immediately	fell	at	Krishna’s	feet	saying,	“Bless
me,	my	Lord.	We	are	blessed	indeed	to	see	the	avatar	of	Lord	Vishnu	with	our
own	eyes.”
Shakuni	rolled	his	eyes	to	the	ceiling.	“The	Lord	is	in	a	hurry,”	he	prompted.
“He	 has	 come	 to	 fetch	 his	 son	 who	 is	 in	 this	 prison	 due	 to	 some
misunderstanding.	Please	take	us	to	his	cell.”
“With	pleasure,	Prabhu.”	The	Deputy	stood	up.

“You	can	stay	here.	Just	tell	us	the	way,”	Krishna	said.
The	Deputy’s	face	fell	but	he	traced	the	way	to	Samba’s	cell	in	the	sand	with	his
baton.	 “Prabhu,	 forgive	 me,	 but	 no	 arms	 are	 allowed	 inside,”	 he	 stammered
apologetically.	With	great	reverence,	he	collected	Krishna’s	Sudharshana	disc
and	Shakuni’s	jewelled	dagger.	As	Krishna	and	Shakuni	entered	the	dungeon,
the	Deputy	called	out,	“Sirs,	the	Nishada	King	is	making	an	inspection	of	the
facilities	also.”
Shakuni	 and	 Krishna	 looked	 at	 each	 other.	 “You	 have	 left	 him	 alone	 without
worrying	over	his	safety?”	Krishna	asked,	trying	to	hide	the	rising	tension	in
his	voice.
The	 Deputy	 looked	 embarrassed	 and	 said	 in	 a	 low	 voice,	 “Sir,	 no	 guard	 was
willing	to	go	with	him	as	he	is	an	untouchable.”
“Fools...	idiots...”	Krishna	hissed	and	ran	into	the	dungeon.
Shakuni	struggled	to	keep	pace.	Prisoners’	screams	filled	the	air	as	they	moved
through	the	underground	prison.	As	they	turned	a	dark	corner,	they	could	hear
the	 rhythmic	 sound	 of	 a	 hard	 object	 hitting	 metal.	 A	 bloodcurdling	 cry	 rose
above	 the	 din	 and	 Krishna	 ran	 towards	 it,	 stumbling	 over	 the	 rocky	 surface.
Shakuni	knew	what	the	sound	was	and	thanked	his	stars.	They	had	made	it	just
in	time.
The	door	to	the	last	cell	stood	wide	open.	In	the	opposite	cell,	a	savage-looking
man	with	a	waist-length	beard	was	screaming	murder.	He	rattled	the	bars	and
tried	 to	 twist	 open	 the	 heavy	 metal	 lock	 with	 his	 hands.	 Durjaya!	 A	 shiver
passed	 through	 Shakuni’s	 frame.	 Thirteen	 years	 of	 incanceration	 in	 this	 dark
dungeon	 had	 made	 Durjaya	 look	 devilish.	 When	 he	 saw	 Shakuni,	 he	 stopped
yelling	and	the	brief	silence	sent	a	chill	down	Shakuni’s	spine.
“Nishada!”	Krishna	screamed.
Shakuni	looked	into	the	cell.	Ekalavya	was	sitting	 on	Samba’s	chest,	choking
Krishna’s	son	to	death.	Krishna	tried	to	prise	him	away.	In	the	throes	of	death,
Samba	 thrashed	 his	 legs	 wildly.	 Krishna	 reached	 for	 his	 Sudharshana	 and
uttered	 a	 curse.	 They	 had	 left	 their	 weapons	 at	 the	 prison	 gate.	 With	 all	 the

force	he	could	muster,	Krishna	hit	Ekalavya,	but	the	Nishada	did	not	even	feel
it.	 Samba’s	 life	 was	 ebbing	 away.	 However	 much	 he	 tried,	 Krishna	 could	 not
prise	Ekalavya’s	hands	that	held	Samba’s	throat	in	a	vice-like	grip.
Shakuni	 searched	 the	 rough	 floor.	 If	 only	 he	 could	 find	 something	 hard,	 a
stone	 perhaps.	 The	 rock	 Ekalavya	 had	 used	 to	 wrench	 open	 the	 cell	 door
grazed	 his	 fingers.	 Krishna	 had	 almost	 given	 up	 hope	 when	 Shakuni	 handed
him	the	stone.	With	all	the	pent	up	anger	and	rage	he	felt,	Krishna	brought	it
down	with	great	force	on	Ekalavya’s	head.	There	was	the	sickening	sound	of	a
skull	 cracking	 and	 Ekalavya’s	 grip	 on	 Samba’s	 throat	 loosened.	 Krishna
brought	down	the	rock	again	and	again	on	Ekalavya’s	head	until	he	collapsed
to	the	ground.	The	glassy	eyes	of	the	Nishada	looked	up	at	his	murderer.	For	a
moment	 Krishna	 thought	 he	 saw	 a	 blazing	 third	 eye	 in	 the	 dark	 forehead.	 He
blinked	 and	 the	 illusion	 disappeared.	 Perhaps	 the	 flickering	 torchlight	 had
played	 tricks	 with	 his	 eyes.	 A	 breeze	 rushed	 through	 the	 damp	 dungeon	 and
snuffed	out	the	struggling	flame,	plunging	them	into	complete	darkness.
The	rock	slipped	from	Krishna’s	hands	and	rolled	away.	His	palm	was	sticky.
Despite	 himself,	 he	 brought	 his	 hand	 up	 to	 his	 nose.	 It	 smelt	 of	 blood,	 of
murder.	 ‘Oh	 God,	 what	 have	 I	 done?’	 Krishna	 shivered.	 He	 had	 slain	 many
people	before,	but	they	were	his	sworn	enemies,	evil	men.	For	the	first	time	in
his	 life,	 he	 felt	 he	 had	 done	 something	 wrong.	 The	 laws	 of	karma	 would	 not
allow	him	to	escape.	He	hoped	his	Yadava	clan	would	not	be	destroyed	in	that
lethal	retribution.
“Is	he	dead?”	Shakuni	whispered.
Krishna	 had	 no	 answer.	 He	 did	 not	 even	 know	 whether	 the	 Gandharan	 was
asking	about	Samba	or	the	Nishada.	He	sat	on	the	damp	ground	with	his	head
buried	in	his	hands,	the	heavy	rock	of	guilt	hammering	at	his	heart.
“I	will	get	a	torch,”	Krishna	heard	Shakuni	say.
The	Gandharan’s	footsteps	faded	away.	Krishna	heard	someone	cough.	Had	the
Nishada	 come	 back	 to	 life?	 He	 lifted	 his	 head	 but	 the	 dark	 contours	 of
Ekalavya’s	body	did	 not	 move.	Again,	he	heard	the	coughing.	 When	his	eyes
had	 adjusted	 to	 the	 shadows,	 he	 saw	 his	 son	 moving.	 Krishna	 felt	 no	 joy	 in
knowing	that	Samba	was	still	alive.	He	was	beyond	any	emotion.	He	struggled

to	find	some	justification	for	what	he	had	done.	He	knew	he	would	carry	this
guilt	to	his	funeral	pyre.
When	Shakuni	returned,	Samba	was	standing.	He	should	have	waited	for	a	few
more	seconds	before	passing	the	rock	to	Krishna,	the	Gandharan	thought	with
a	 slight	 grimace.	 In	 the	 flickering	 light	 of	 the	 torch	 he	 held,	 he	 saw	 Samba’s
eyes	glittering	with	maniacal	rage.
“Ekalavya	 is	 dead.	 You	 are	 safe,	 my	 son.	 We	 saved	 you,	 Samba,”	 Shakuni
cried,	backing	away	a	few	steps	from	the	scene.
Krishna	 woke	 from	 his	 stupor.	 “What	 you	 have	 made	 me	 do?”	 he	 cried,
looking	at	his	son.
“One	Nishada	less	is	one	trouble	less,”	retorted	Samba.
A	vein	throbbed	in	Krishna’s	neck	as	he	looked	at	his	son.
“You	saved	my	life,	but	as	a	father	it	was	your	duty	and	your	dharma	to	do	so.
Why	are	you	so	glum?”	Samba	said,	backing	out	of	the	cell.
“You	 have	 made	 me	 do	 something	 I	 will	 always	 be	 ashamed	 of,”	 Krishna
replied	quietly.
“Just	think	of	him	as	a	Rakshasa	you	killed	to	save	the	world,	or	say	that	you
gave	him	moksha	 and	 that	 he	 is	 now	 in	 Vaikunta,	 enjoying	 all	 the	 things	 that
were	 denied	 to	 him	 in	 this	 life.	 Dhaumya	 will	 know	 how	 to	 spread	 the	 right
rumours.	Why	worry?	Let	us	get	out	of	this	hellhole	and	go	back	to	Dwaraka.
Life	is	too	short	to	worry	about	a	dead	Nishada.”
Krishna’s	 eyes	 hardened	 but	 Samba’s	 lips	 curved	 into	 a	 derisive	 smile.	 He
knew	how	to	control	his	father.
Durjaya	 shouted	 from	 the	 other	 cell,	 “Friend,	 friend...have	 you	 forgotten	 our
deal?	Have	you	forgotten	our	pact	that	whoever	gets	free	first,	will	release	the
other?”
“Oh,	never!	Samba	always	stands	by	his	friends,”	Samba	said	as	he	pushed	past
Krishna.	He	kicked	Ekalavya’s	body,	picked	up	the	bloody	rock	that	had	killed

the	Nishada,	and	rushed	towards	Durjaya’s	cell.
“What	 are	 you	 doing?”	 Shakuni	 asked,	 trying	 to	 stop	 Samba,	 horrified	 at	 the
thought	 of	 the	 consequences.	 Things	 had	 been	 going	 terribly	 wrong	 for	 the
Gandharan	in	the	last	few	moments.	If	Durjaya	was	freed	on	terms	other	than
his,	he	knew	he	would	never	be	able	to	control	the	crime	lord.
Samba	 shoved	 Shakuni	 away.	 The	 torch	 rolled	 away	 from	 his	 hands	 and
shadows	 danced	 in	 its	 haphazard	 light.	 Samba	 broke	 open	 the	 heavy	 lock	 on
Durjaya’s	 cell	 with	 powerful	 blows.	 Durjaya	 grabbed	 the	 rock	 from	 Samba’s
hands	and	rushed	to	the	next	cell,	and	the	next,	breaking	the	bolts	and	freeing
his	followers.
Krishna	heard	soldiers	rushing	in	and	the	yells	of	men	fighting	a	pitched	battle.
They	appeared	to	be	in	the	midst	of	a	prison	riot.
“Fool!	What	have	you	done?”	Krishna	hissed	at	Samba.
“Durjaya	is	to	me	what	the	Pandavas	are	to	you.	Is	it	not	my	dharma	to	help	my
friend	when	he	is	in	distress?”	Samba	hissed	back	at	his	father.	“Durjaya,	throw
this	trash	in	some	forest,”	Samba	shouted	over	the	din,	pointing	to	Ekalavya’s
still	 body.	 Durjaya	 ran	 back	 to	 them	 with	 two	 of	 his	 men.	 One	 of	 them	 lifted
Ekalavya	onto	his	shoulder.
“A	 feast	 for	 the	 beasts	 of	 the	 forests,”	 gloated	 Samba,	 punching	 Ekalavya’s
face.
Krishna	was	horrified	by	his	son’s	words	and	actions.	Was	this	beast	really	the
flesh	of	his	flesh?	Did	his	blood	flow	through	his	veins?
“All	the	guards	are	dead	and	we	have	lost	twenty	men.	No	one	escaped	to	raise
an	alarm,”	one	of	Durjaya’s	men	shouted.
“Good!”	 Durjaya	 hugged	 Samba	 and	 bowed	 to	 Krishna.	 Then	 he	 turned
towards	 Shakuni	 who	 was	 trying	 to	 remain	 inconspicuous	 in	 a	 corner.
“Mlecha,	say	your	last	prayers!”	he	yelled	with	glee.
Two	dozen	men	advanced	towards	Shakuni.	The	Gandharan’s	hand	reached	for
his	dagger;	and	he	cursed	when	he	did	not	find	it.	Of	course,	it	had	been	taken

from	him	at	the	entrance.
“Bloody	foreigner!	You	betrayed	me!	Thirteen	years	I	have	rotted	in	this	dark
dungeon.	That	is	what	your	friendship	earned	us.	You	will	pay	for	it,	my	dear
friend.”	Durjaya	walked	towards	Shakuni,	terrible	intent	clear	in	his	eyes.
“Durjaya,	wait!	I	can	explain.	Don’t	act	in	haste	and	regret	it	later.”	Shakuni’s
voice	faltered.	He	stumbled	backwards	until	his	head	hit	an	overhanging	rock.
“Don’t	kill	me.”	Shakuni	cursed	himself	for	the	fear	he	felt.	He	was	going	to
die	like	a	rat	at	the	hands	of	vermin	like	Durjaya.	He	would	die	without	having
achieved	 his	 life’s	 ambition	 of	 destroying	 India.	 ‘Lords	 of	 heaven	 and	 earth,
give	 me	 one	 more	 chance,’	 he	 prayed	 fervently,	 every	 fibre	 of	 his	 being
beseeching	his	Gods	above	for	a	reprieve.
“Kill	 you?	 Why	 would	 I	 kill	 you	 so	 quickly?	 You	 are	 coming	 with	 us,”	 said
Durjaya,	shaking	him	by	his	hair.
Men	 rushed	 to	 Shakuni,	 punching	 and	 kicking.	 The	 Gandharan	 knew	 it	 was
useless	to	resist	and	so	fell	to	the	ground,	feigning	unconsciousness.
“Samba,	we	will	meet	again	someday.	For	now,	I	am	taking	your	dead	Nishada
and	my	old	friend,	Shakuni.”	Durjaya	and	his	men	rushed	out	of	the	dungeon,
carrying	Ekalavya’s	dead	body	and	Shakuni’s	inert	form	with	them.
When	Krishna	and	Samba	emerged,	stepping	over	the	bodies	of	the	slain	men,
it	 was	 already	 dark	 outside.	 They	 later	 learnt	 that	 Durjaya	 had	 murdered	 the
stable	guards	and	ridden	away	on	the	stolen	horses.	The	hunt	for	the	fugitives
would	 prove	 futile.	 Durjaya	 and	 his	 gang	 would	 come	 to	 haunt	 the	 Yadavas
later,	 but	 they	 did	 not	 know	 it	 at	 the	 time.	 Survival	 was	 the	 greatest	 dharma,
Krishna	 tried	 to	 convince	 himself.	 He	 had	 to	 get	 away	 before	 Duryodhana
learnt	 the	 truth.	 It	 was	 essential	 his	 loutish	 son	 marry	 Suyodhana’s	 daughter
before	 he	 discovered	 what	 had	 happened.	 Once	 the	 marriage	 rites	 had	 been
performed,	 Duryodhana	 would	 not	 do	 anything	 to	 harm	 his	 son-in-law.	 The
life	 of	 a	 widow	 was	 the	 worst	 fate	 a	 father	 could	 inflict	 upon	 his	 daughter.
However,	 for	 everything	 to	 go	 according	 to	 plan,	 Samba	 had	 to	 agree	 to	 the
marriage.
“I	 found	 you	 lying	 unconscious	 in	 prison	 and	 brought	 you	 out.	 There	 was	 a

riot...	the	guards	had	been	already	killed	when	I	got	there.	That	will	be	the	story
we	will	relate.	We	have	not	seen	Shakuni	or	Ekalavya,”	Krishna	said,	his	mouth
tasting	of	ashes.
“Whatever	you	say,	Father.	But	I	do	not	fancy	that	girl	anymore.	I	had	her	and
she	holds	no	further	charm	for	me.	Nevertheless,	if	it	makes	you	happy,	I	will
marry	her.	This	is	a	good	kingdom;	once	I	take	care	of	that	boy-lover	brother
of	hers,	it	will	be	mine.	I	will	keep	your	dirty	secret	safe,	but	never	lord	it	over
me	again,”	said	Samba,	a	lopsided	grin	on	his	rugged	face.
Krishna	wished	he	had	smashed	his	son’s	head	instead	of	the	Nishada’s	skull.	It
was	 too	 late	 now.	 Samba	 was	 his	 burden,	 the	 burden	 all	 fathers	 who	 sired
wayward	 sons	 carried.	 ‘Karmaphala,	 the	 fruits	 of	 karma,’	 he	 sighed,	 as	 he
dragged	himself	towards	the	palace	where	Duryodhana	waited.
*****

39			SOLITARY	SOUL
	
“SWAMI,	 SWAMI!”	 THE	 PANICKED	 VOICE	woke	Vidhura	from	a	disturbed	sleep.	He

reached	out	to	touch	his	wife’s	forehead.	It	was	burning	hot.	She	looked	even
more	 frail	 than	 she	 had	 the	 previous	 day,	 but	 somehow	 she	 had	 survived
another	night.	God	be	praised	for	His	mercy.
“Swami!”	the	voice	grew	frantic.
Vidhura	rose	from	his	bed,	opened	the	rickety	door,	and	peered	out.
Jara	and	his	dog	stood	outside.
“Swami,	come	with	me.”	Jara	began	running	off	without	waiting	for	Vidhura’s
reply.
Vidhura	followed	as	fast	as	his	rheumatic	legs	would	carry	him.	They	reached
a	 clearing	 where	 some	 tribals	 stood	 around	 something	 lying	 on	 the	 ground.
The	smell	of	putrefying	flesh	was	like	a	physical	blow.	Vidhura	willed	himself
to	 look.	 It	 bore	 little	 resemblance	 to	 a	 man,	 much	 less	 a	 warrior.	 Jara	 sat
nearby,	 tears	 running	 down	 his	 face.	 The	 dog	 sniffed	 at	 the	 remains	 of	 the
body,	but	Jara	pulled	the	animal	back.	The	man	had	been	dead	for	a	long	time.
Flies	 buzzed	 over	 the	 bloated	 face.	 There	 were	 open	 wounds	 all	 over	 the
sagging	black	skin.	Wild	beasts	had	been	there	before	them.
Fighting	the	bile	that	rose	to	his	throat,	Vidhura	bent	to	look	closer.	Where	has
he	seen	this	man?	Then	it	struck	him	like	a	thunderbolt.	Ekalavya!	Memories	of
the	proud	boy	who	had	sat	in	his	home	years	before,	refusing	a	second	serving
of	food,	came	rushing	to	his	mind.
“I	 loved	 him	 like	 my	 brother.	 He	 was	 my	 brother,	 Swami.”	 Jara	 cried.	 “But
everything	is	Maya;	Krishna	is	testing	us.	No	one	ever	dies,	Swami.	The	soul	is
immortal.	Krishna	knows	everything.	He	sees	everything.	He	is	compassionate.

He	would	never	let	this	happen	without	a	reason.	We	are	merely	fools	who	do
not	 understand,	 Swami.	 But	 when	 I	 look	 at	 my	 brother ’s	 face,	 I	 forget
Krishna’s	divine	teachings.	I	do	not	deserve	to	be	a	Krishna	bhakta,	Swami.”
“Get	me	a	shovel,”	Vidhura	said	curtly	to	the	men	standing	around.	He	was	not
in	a	position	to	give	Ekalavya	a	proper	funeral.	Burning	his	body	might	attract
someone’s	 attention.	 Already	 these	 tribals	 had	 seen	 it.	 He	 had	 to	 extract	 a
promise	from	them	that	they	would	keep	quiet.	One	day	or	the	other	the	truth
would	come	out,	but	he	would	delay	it	as	long	as	possible.	The	country	could
not	afford	a	war,	not	when	people	were	dying	from	the	drought.
The	 men	 returned	 with	 some	 rusty	 implements	 and	 they	 began	 to	 dig.	 The
ground	was	rock	hard	and	it	took	them	a	long	time	to	make	a	pit	deep	enough
to	 bury	 the	 Nishada	 who	 had	 once	 dreamt	 of	 challenging	 Arjuna.	 If	 they	 had
fought	on	equal	terms,	who	would	have	won,	wondered	Vidhura.	Could	a	selftaught	Nishada,	who	lacked	a	thumb,	have	possibly	defeated	the	greatest	archer
in	 Bharatavarsha?	 It	 did	 not	 matter	 now.	 The	 Nishada	 was	 dead.	 He	 had
deserved	 much	 more	 in	 life.	 Even	 in	 death,	 he	 was	 denied	 the	 dignity	 he
merited.	 Had	 he	 been	 born	 in	 some	 other	 country,	 far	 from	 this	 holy	 land,
bards	would	have	sung	of	his	heroic	deeds	for	thousands	of	years.
“Do	not	speak	about	this	to	anyone,”	Vidhura	called	out	as	Jara	began	to	walk
away,	his	shoulders	bent,	his	dog	trotting	behind.
“I	will	not,	Swami.	Life	and	death	are	like	day	and	night,	a	part	of	nature.	His
soul	is	immortal.	It	will	have	reached	Vaikunta,	at	the	feet	of	Lord	Vishnu.	I	cry
because	I	am	sad	and	ignorant.	May	Krishna	give	me	wisdom.”
The	men	who	had	found	Ekalavya	soon	dispersed.	Vidhura	stood	alone	in	the
forest	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 Around	 him,	 gnarled	 trees	 begged	 the	 sky	 for	 water.
Bird	 cries	 were	 now	 just	 faded	 memories.	 The	 sun	 glowed	 like	 a	 fireball,
sucking	 life	 out	 of	 the	 earth.	 When	 his	 shadow	 grew	 long,	 Vidhura	 walked
back	to	his	hut,	wiping	the	sweat	from	his	body	with	his	shabby	angavastra.
Life	 had	 not	 been	 easy	 for	 Vidhura.	 His	 wife	 had	 been	 sick	 for	 a	 long	 time.
What	 he	 earned	 by	 teaching	 a	 few	 students	 was	 hardly	 enough	 to	 keep	 his
family	from	starving.	In	the	initial	days	he	had	taught	students	of	all	castes	and
found	some	happiness	in	passing	on	what	he	knew.	But	soon	the	students	had

dropped	out,	one	by	one.	Except	for	the	brahmacharis	Sage	Vyasa	sent	his	way
occasionally,	there	was	no	one	willing	to	learn	the	Vedas	from	a	Shudra.	The
upper	castes	detested	him	and	the	lower	castes	found	no	value	in	learning	what
he	had	to	offer.	His	sons	grew	up	wild	and	ignorant.	They	even	shared	the	same
woman,	 emulating	 the	 five	 Pandava	 brothers	 who	 had	 married	 Draupadi.
Vidhura’s	heart	ached	for	his	sons.
When	he	opened	the	reed	door	of	his	hut,	Vidhura	saw	he	was	now	alone	in	the
world.	Parshavi	looked	serene	in	death.	Vidhura	sat	on	the	mud	floor	looking
at	her	still	beautiful	face.	He	had	failed	her	as	a	husband.	He	had	not	even	been
there	when	she	left	him	forever.	He	had	gone	to	bury	a	Nishada,	as	though	it
was	more	important	than	bidding	farewell	to	the	woman	who	had	suffered	with
him	for	twenty-five	long	years.	He	wanted	to	say	many	things	to	her,	apologize
for	 everything	 and	 nothing,	 but	 the	 words	 had	 lost	 all	 sense	 for	 her,	 and	 for
him.	The	hut	seemed	destitute	without	her,	just	like	his	life.	Vidhura	wept.
*****

40			RANSOM
	
“IS	 THIS	 A	 BEGGAR’S	 RANSOM?”	 Durjaya	 asked	 and	 his	 companions	 roared	 with

laughter.	Moving	towards	the	boy,	he	lifted	the	stubborn	chin	with	the	tip	of	his
dagger.	 “Thirteen	 years	 in	 a	 dark	 dungeon	 infested	 by	 rats	 and	 scorpions	 is
what	I	got	for	trusting	your	father,”	Durjaya	spat	out.
Swallowing	his	shame,	Uluka	fell	at	Durjaya’s	feet.	Shakuni	averted	his	eyes.
His	 son,	 the	 scion	 of	 Gandhara,	 falling	 at	 the	 feet	 of	 a	 worthless	 criminal!
‘Father,	forgive	me,	but	it	is	all	for	the	cause.	I	will	make	India	pay	tenfold	and
its	soil	will	be	soaked	in	blood,’	he	vowed	silently	as	he	watched	his	son	abase
himself.
“Sir,	 have	 mercy.	 We	 have	 stripped	 our	 places	 of	 worship,	 emptied	 our
treasury,	 begged	 each	 household	 in	 Gandhara	 for	 gold.	 We	 have	 pawned	 all
our	assets,	including	our	palace,	to	the	merchant	Yuyutsu	–	all	for	my	father ’s
life.”
His	son	was	begging,	kneeling	at	the	criminal’s	feet.	It	was	almost	more	than
Shakuni	could	bear.	Perhaps	it	would	be	better	to	die	and	spare	Gandhara	this
shame.	But	that	was	the	coward’s	way.	His	country	was	more	important	than	his
pride.
“Lick	my	feet,”	Durjaya	ordered.
There	was	a	moment’s	hushed	silence	and	then	more	howling	laughter.	Uluka
licked	 Durjaya’s	 feet.	 Shakuni’s	 fingers	 dug	 into	 his	 thighs.	 Someone	 cut	 the
ropes	that	bound	him	and	Durjaya	yanked	Uluka	up	from	the	floor.
“Mlecha,	I	am	sparing	your	life	for	now.	The	Crown	Prince	of	Gandhara	has
licked	 my	 feet	 for	 your	 life.”	 The	 laughter	 was	 like	 molten	 lead	 poured	 into
Shakuni’s	ears.	Durjaya’s	hand	tightened	around	Shakuni’s	throat.	“I	can	reach
deep	into	your	country,	Mlecha.	Wag	your	tail	again	and	you	won’t	even	know

what	hit	you.”	Durjaya	pushed	Shakuni	away	disdainfully.
Durjaya’s	men	shoved	the	treasure	into	sacks.	Gandhara’s	treasures.	When	they
had	taken	the	last	coin	from	the	ground,	someone	kicked	Shakuni	in	the	face.
Soon	others	were	doing	the	same.	Shakuni	coiled	into	a	foetal	position.	He	was
determined	not	to	give	them	the	pleasure	of	hearing	him	cry	in	pain.
Like	 a	 storm	 passing,	 Shakuni’s	 tormentors	 grew	 tired	 of	 the	 sport	 and	 went
away.	 He	 steadied	 himself,	 supported	 by	 his	 son.	 Uluka	 half-carried,	 halfdragged	 his	 father	 away.	 Without	 his	 son,	 he	 would	 have	 slipped	 on	 his	 own
blood.	A	pariah	kite	was	circling	in	the	gloomy	sky	outside.	Shakuni	stared	at	it
for	a	long	time	and	found	his	strength	creeping	back.	“How	did	you	raise	so
much	money?”
“I	 emptied	 the	 treasury,	 pawned	 the	 palace	 to	 Yuyutsu,	 and	 when	 that	 was	 not
enough,	begged	the	people.”
“Did	 you	 use	 force	 to	 collect	 the	 ransom?”	 Shakuni	 asked.	 The	 kite’s	 circles
were	becoming	tighter.
“Not	 really.	 Most	 of	 our	 countrymen	 love	 you	 more	 than	 I	 ever	 could.”	 His
son’s	voice	betrayed	an	odd	sense	of	pride.
Shakuni	suppressed	the	sob	that	threatened	to	break	his	heart.	He	could	not	fail
his	people’s	trust.	The	kite	circled	in	the	air.
“Father,”	his	son’s	hand	was	gentle	on	his	shoulders,	“come	home.”
“What	would	you	have	done	if	Durjaya	had	killed	me?”
“I	 would	 have	 led	 the	 Gandhara	 army	 to	 Hastinapura	 to	 capture	 and	 strangle
him	to	death.”
Shakuni’s	 eyes	 blurred	 with	 tears.	 “Son,	 I	 am	 doing	 the	 same	 thing	 for	 my
massacred	 father	 and	 brothers.	 This	 is	 my	 dharma.	 When	 you	 get	 home,	 tell
our	 people	 that	 no	 King	 ever	 loved	 his	 people	 as	 much	 as	 Shakuni	 has.	 Beg
their	pardon	for	the	wrongs	I	have	done	them.”
Shakuni	limped	away.	Any	more	words	and	he	would	have	cried	like	a	child.

He	saw	the	kite	dive	into	the	forest	like	an	arrow.	It	must	have	found	its	prey.
He	wiped	the	blood	from	his	lips.	He	should	have	said	a	proper	goodbye	to	his
son,	embraced	him	one	last	time.	He	was	not	sure	he	would	see	Uluka	again.
The	time	had	come	for	a	final	roll	of	the	dice.
*****

41			VIRATA
	
SHAKUNI	TOOK	A	DEEP	BREATH	before	entering	his	nephew’s	chambers.

“Where	have	you	been?”	Suyodhana	asked	with	a	trace	of	irritation.
Karna	and	Aswathama	looked	at	each	other.
Shakuni	bowed	low.	Should	he	tell	Suyodhana	about	Ekalavya’s	death	now	or
later?	It	would	be	better	to	save	it	for	later,	when	the	impact	would	be	greater.
“I	had	some	urgent	business	in	Gandhara.	The	Yavanas	dared	to	attack	again.	I
heard	 about	 the	 prison	 riots.	 Have	 you	 caught	 Durjaya?	 I	 am	 sorry	 to	 have
missed	 Lakshmana’s	 wedding.	 Your	 plan	 to	 blow	 the	 Pandavas’	 cover	 and
avoid	a	costly	war	is	certainly	a	clever	one,	Suyodhana.”	Shakuni	smiled	thinly
at	his	nephew.
“We	 have	no	 time	to	worry	about	Durjaya	now.	Our	soldiers	are	out	hunting
for	the	Pandavas	but	there	are	only	15	days	left	for	the	end	of	their	exile.	How
are	we	to	entice	them	out	of	hiding?”	Sushasana	asked.
“Ah,	 Sushasana,	 I	 didn’t	 even	 see	 you	 sitting	 in	 that	 dark	 corner.	 Think,	 my
nephew,	 what	 would	 force	 them	 to	 leave	 Virata?	 What	 is	 their	 greatest
strength?	Think	how	we	can	convert	it	into	their	greatest	weakness,”	responded
his	uncle.
“They	claim	they	are	the	sons	of	Gods,”	suggested	Sushasana.
“Their	pride	in	their	skill	with	arms?”	Aswathama	asked.
Shakuni	kept	pulling	at	his	salt	and	pepper	beard.	Finally,	when	there	were	no
more	 ideas	 forthcoming,	 he	 said,	 “Suyodhana,	 their	 greatest	 strength	 is	 the
support	they	enjoy	from	the	orthodox.	Attack	anything	that	is	considered	holy
by	the	priests,	and	we	can	force	Yudhishtra	to	come	out	and	fight.”

“Are	you	going	to	tell	us	or	not?”	Sushasana	asked	impatiently.	He	was	tired	of
his	uncle	talking	in	riddles.
“Patience	 is	 a	 virtue	 you	 should	 practise	 more,	 nephew.	 The	 Virata	 King	 has
thousands	of	cows.	Steal	them	and	you	will	have	all	the	priests	screaming	for
war.	To	them,	a	cow’s	life	is	more	precious	than	that	of	a	man.	The	Pandavas
would	have	to	fight	to	protect	the	cows.”	Shakuni	sat	back	and	waited	for	their
reaction.
“Tchaw!	The	Pandavas	did	not	even	fight	for	their	wife;	do	you	think	they	will
fight	for	a	few	cows?”	Suyodhana	said	dismissively.
“Nephew,	 to	 such	 people,	 a	 wife’s	 honour	 can	 be	 pawned	 but	 a	 cow’s	 life
cannot	be	compromised.	The	easiest	way	to	conquer	Bharatavarsha	is	to	march
a	few	cows	before	the	invading	army.”
“That	is	not	an	honourable	way,”	Karna	said	coldly.
“Fine	 then,	 go	 ahead	 and	 declare	 war	 on	 Virata.	 The	 Pandavas	 would	 sneak
away	 like	 rats	 while	you	fought	 a	useless	war	with	a	vassal	 state.	Remember,
you	have	just	two	weeks	to	blow	their	cover.	Fail	and	they	will	come	back	to
claim	 their	 share	 of	 the	 kingdom.	 Do	 you	 really	 want	 that?”	 Shakuni	 studied
Suyodhana’s	face.
“Let	them	come.	I	am	waiting	to	fight	Arjuna,”	Karna	replied.
“A	 war	 would	 be	 devastating.	 The	 rains	 have	 failed	 and	 the	 granaries	 are
empty.	Already	half	the	country’s	assets	have	been	pawned	to	Yuyutsu.	I	do	not
know	 how	 we	 will	 ever	 get	 that	 merchant	 off	 our	 backs.	 But	 we	 cannot	 have
him	joining	the	Pandavas	with	his	enormous	wealth	and	private	army.	No,	my
uncle	 is	 right.	 In	 this	 way,	 we	 avoid	 a	 disastrous	 war.	 Let	 us	 try	 to	 lure	 the
Pandavas	 out	 of	 hiding,”	 Suyodhana	 said	 thoughtfully,	 ignoring	 Karna	 and
Aswathama’s	protests.
While	Suyodhana	and	his	friends	debated	the	details,	Shakuni	did	some	mental
arithmetic.	 Perfect!	 If	 he	 played	 the	 game	 with	 finesse,	 he	 could	 make	 both
parties	 think	 they	 were	 right.	 That	 would	 be	 some	 war,	 where	 both	 parties
fought	 for	 dharma	 –	 a	 dharmayudha	 –	 a	 holy	 and	 righteous	 war	 which	 any

prophet	 would	 approve.	 What	 was	 it	 that	 Suyodhana	 had	 said	 about	 Yuyutsu?
That	could	be	something	to	explore.	Also,	the	Southern	Confederate	had	to	be
dragged	in	somehow	and	the	drought	and	famine	conditions	exploited.	Things
were	certainly	getting	interesting.
***
“There	 he	 is!”	 Suyodhana	 exclaimed,	 unable	 to	 conceal	 his	 delight.	 He	 had
brought	a	small	force	with	him	to	Virata	and	in	the	dead	of	the	night,	they	had
overpowered	 the	 guards	 at	 the	 royal	 barns	 and	 driven	 out	 all	 the	 cows.	 By
morning,	Suyodhana’s	spies	had	spread	the	rumour	that	his	army	was	going	to
feast	 on	 beef.	 That	 was	 sure	 to	 provoke	 the	 conservatives	 who	 valued	 cows
over	men.	If	the	Pandavas	were	hiding	in	Virata,	Yudhishtra	would	be	forced	to
fight	 to	 save	 the	 cows	 if	 he	 wanted	 to	 retain	 the	 support	 of	 the	 Priests.	 They
could	 murder	 the	 entire	 population	 of	 Khandivaprastha	 and	 still	 be	 called
righteous,	but	they	would	be	damned	if	they	let	a	single	cow	die!	The	idea	was
not	 to	 fight	 a	 full-fledged	 battle	 but	 to	 smoke	 out	 the	 Pandavas	 if	 they	 were
hiding	in	the	kingdom.	Shakuni’s	idea	was	perfect	in	its	simplicity.	Suyodhana
made	 a	 mental	 note	 to	 thank	 his	 uncle	 for	 avoiding	 a	 major	 war	 that	 would
have	ruined	Bharatavarsha.
The	man,	dressed	as	a	woman,	who	was	leading	the	Virata	army	could	be	none
other	 than	 Arjuna.	 Suyodhana	 looked	 back	 at	 his	 commanders	 and	 shouted,
“We	have	found	them!	Another	thirteen	years	of	exile	for	the	Pandavas.”
Suyodhana	was	surprised	to	see	that	neither	Bhishma	nor	Drona	shared	his	joy.
Which	 side	 were	 they	 on?	 He	 had	 avoided	 a	 major	 conflict	 by	 finding
Pandavas	 in	 the	 nick	 of	 time,	 just	 twelve	 days	 before	 their	 period	 of	 exile
ended.
“From	 this	 distance	 we	 cannot	 be	 sure	 whether	 it	 is	 Arjuna	 or	 not.	 It	 appears
that	 their	 commander	 is	 a	 woman.	 We	 have	 to	 categorically	 prove	 it	 is	 the
Pandavas,”	Bhishma	said,	shielding	his	eyes	from	the	blazing	sun.	Behind	the
Kaurava	army,	the	stolen	cows	mooed	piteously.
“Oh,	I	shall	prove	it,”	Karna	said,	twanging	his	bowstring.
“Karna,	watch	 out!”	Aswathama	screamed	 as	an	 arrow	broke	Karna’s	 bow	 in

two.
“It	is	Arjuna!	No	one	can	shoot	like	that,”	Guru	Drona	said	with	utter	certainty.
Suyodhana	 was	 relieved.	 Drona	 himself	 had	 acknowledged	 it	 was	 Arjuna.	 He
had	 achieved	 his	 goal.	 He	 turned	 to	 Shakuni	 to	 thank	 him	 for	 the	 wonderful
plan.	 To	 his	 surprise,	 he	 found	 Shakuni	 had	 left	 his	 position	 and	 was	 near
Karna.	 What	 was	 he	 saying	 to	 him?	 All	 of	 a	 sudden,	 Suyodhana	 saw	 Karna
charging	towards	Arjuna	recklessly.
“Karna,	 hold	 on!	 You	 will	 be	 trapped.”	 Suyodhana	 heard	 Aswathama	 yell
desperately.
Suyodhana’s	 heart	 skipped	 a	 beat.	 What	 was	 Karna	 trying	 to	 do?	 Commit
suicide?	“Karna,	come	back!	There	is	no	need	to	fight.	We	have	found	Arjuna.”
Suyodhana	shouted	just	as	he	was	hit	in	the	arm	by	another	well-aimed	arrow.
“Retreat!”	 Suyodhana	 heard	 Bhishma	 voice	 as	 the	 conch	 shell	 sounded,
ordering	 a	 retreat.	 Bhishma	 had	 been	 made	 Supreme	 Commander	 and	 on	 the
battlefield.	His	conch	shell	was	the	final	call.
The	 Hastinapura	 forces	 turned	 back	 just	 as	 the	 Virata	 army,	 led	 by	 Arjuna,
charged.
“Pitamaha,	Karna	will	get	trapped.	He	does	not	have	the	support	of	our	cavalry
and	 elephant	 corps,”	 Suyodhana	 shouted	 to	 his	 Supreme	 Commander,
desperately	trying	to	keep	his	horse	from	turning	tail.
Arrows	 rained	 around	 Suyodhana	 as	 his	 army	 fled	 in	 a	 disorganised	 retreat,
pushing	him	back	with	them	like	a	tidal	wave.
“Retreat!”	Bhishma	blew	the	conch	again	and	the	retreat	became	a	stampede.
Horses	galloped	past	Suyodhana,	raising	a	dust	storm.	Arjuna’s	army	advanced
on	 them	 like	 a	 flash	 flood.	 Why	 were	 his	 commanders,	 Drona	 and	 Bhishma,
not	 trying	 to	 rescue	 Karna?	 He	 had	 done	 a	 reckless	 thing	 and	 it	 was
inexcusable	 to	 break	 discipline,	 but	 he	 could	 not	 leave	 Karna	 to	 his	 fate.	 A
single	 man	 could	 not	 stand	 against	 such	 an	 army,	 even	 if	 he	 was	 Karna,	 the
formidable	warrior.

He	 saw	 Aswathama	 galloping	 towards	 Karna,	 holding	 off	 Arjuna’s	 advance
single-handedly.	But	how	long	could	he	last?	Drona	shouted	at	Aswathama	to
come	back,	but	the	Guru’s	son	fought	his	way	to	Karna’s	aid.
“You	can	forget	about	your	friends,	Suyodhana.	Retreat	safely	if	you	want	to
stay	alive	to	fight	again,”	Shakuni	advised	his	nephew	before	galloping	away,
without	waiting	for	an	answer.
“Fool!	What	are	you	gaping	at	Suyodhana	for?	Retreat!”
Suyodhana	heard	Bhishma’s	voice	near	him.	What	was	the	Pitamaha	still	doing
here?	“I	cannot	leave	them	to	die,”	Suyodhana	said,	not	looking	at	Bhishma.
“I	 took	 charge	 of	 this	 army	 on	 condition	 that	 there	 would	 be	 no	 unnecessary
bloodshed.	 We	 have	 found	 Arjuna;	 we	 have	 won.	 I	 am	 not	 responsible	 if	 a
Suta’s	 bowstring	 was	 broken	 by	 his	 foe.	 We	 cannot	 fight	 because	 of	 the
frustrated	and	fragile	ego	of	a	Suta.”
Suyodhana	did	not	reply.	What	Karna	had	done	was	inexcusable	from	the	point
of	view	of	any	Commander,	yet	he	could	not	leave	his	friend	to	die.	He	heard
Drona’s	panicked	voice	behind	him	and	turned.
“Sir,	I	seek	permission	to	assist	my	son.”	Drona	stood	impatiently,	waiting	for
his	Commander ’s	permission.
“Denied,”	Bhishma	said,	looking	straight	ahead.
“Sir,	 my	 son	 is	 in	 grave	 danger.	 Give	 me	 a	 few	 soldiers	 to	 bring	 him	 back
safely,”	 Drona	 pleaded	 “Denied.	 You	 are	 ordered	 to	 retreat	 with	 your
division,”	 Bhishma	 said	 and	 his	 chariot	 shot	 forward.	 Around	 them
Hastinapura’s	imperial	army	was	rushing	back	to	safety.
“That	Suta	will	get	my	son	killed,”	Drona	said,	his	head	hung	in	despair.
Suyodhana	was	surprised	at	the	depth	of	Drona’s	emotion.	Why	then	did	father
and	son	argue	so	much	if	they	loved	each	other	so	deeply?	“Guru,	come	with
me.	I	am	going	to	save	them,”	Suyodhana	said.
Guru	Drona’s	nostrils	flared.	“You	think	war	is	a	joke?	The	Commander	has

given	the	order	to	retreat.	There	should	be	no	question	about	not	following	it.
How	dare	you	go	against	his	order?”
“Sir,	 it	 is	 to	 save	 your	 son,”	 Suyodhana	 said,	 surprised	 at	 the	 Guru’s
vehemence.
“An	order	is	an	order	in	battle.	It	does	not	matter	whether	your	son	or	brother
is	 in	 danger.”	 Drona’s	 chariot	 carried	 away	 the	 ramrod	 straight	 figure	 of	 the
Guru.
Suyodhana	hesitated	a	moment	and	then	rushed	to	Karna’s	aid.	He	could	hear
Bhishma	 shouting	 at	 him	 to	 turn	 back,	 but	 he	 could	 not	 have	 cared	 less.	 His
friend	 was	 in	 danger	 and	 nothing	 else	 mattered.	 Seeing	 Suyodhana	 dashing
towards	 Karna,	 Bhishma	 and	 Drona	 turned	 their	 chariots	 and	 followed	 him
into	the	fight	with	Arjuna.
***
“I	 failed	 you.	 You	 should	 have	 left	 me	 to	 die,”	 Karna’s	 voice	 cracked	 as	 he
turned	away	from	Suyodhana,	sitting	near	his	bed.	From	a	corner	of	the	room,
Aswathama	stood	staring	at	them	both,	a	stony	expression	on	his	face.
“I	did	not	save	you.	It	was	Bhishma	and	Drona,”	Suyodhana	said.	How	could	he
tell	Karna	that	Arjuna	had	mercifully	desisted	from	killing	him	when	Bhishma
had	appealed	to	his	nephew?
In	fact,	Arjuna	had	spared	them	all.	He	had	used	the	sammohana	missile	to	stun
rather	 than	 kill.	 Perhaps	 the	 presence	 of	 Bhishma	 and	 Drona	 had	 restrained
him.
It	was	the	worst	day	in	Suyodhana’s	life.	It	had	been	a	complete	rout	at	Arjuna’s
hands.	 True,	 they	 had	 taken	 only	 a	 small	 force	 and	 planned	 to	 find	 the
Pandavas,	not	fight	them,	but	had	it	not	been	for	Karna’s	reckless	charge,	they
would	have	made	an	orderly	retreat	under	Bhishma’s	command,	without	loss
of	lives	on	either	side.	There	had	been	no	need	for	Karna	to	act	so	rashly.	They
had	 already	 blown	 the	 Pandavas’	 cover	 and	 the	 results	 of	 the	 Virata	 skirmish
did	 not	 matter.	 What	 had	 Shakuni	 said	 to	 Karna	 to	 make	 him	 behave	 so
foolishly,	so	unlike	his	calm	self?

Vrishali	 stifled	 a	 sob	 and	 Karna’s	 face	 darkened.	 “Prince,	 we	 are	 thankful	 to
you	 for	 what	 you	 did,	 we	 are	 indebted	 to	 you	 for	 your	 kindness.”	 Vrishali
stopped	when	she	saw	Karna’s	stern	expression.
“Leave	us!”	Karna’s	voice	was	soft	but	it	felt	like	a	whiplash.
The	blood	drained	from	Vrishali’s	face	but	she	looked	at	Suyodhana,	her	hands
folded	in	supplication.	“I	don’t	want	to	see	him	dead,”	she	said,	her	eyes	filled
with	tears.
“I	prefer	death	to	this	humiliating	defeat	to	Arjuna.	I	was	reckless	and	paid	the
price.	I	have	failed	you,	Suyodhana.	I	am	of	no	value	to	you.	I	am	a	parasite.”
Karna	turned	to	face	the	wall.
“But	what	made	you	do	something	so	rash,	Karna?”	Aswathama	asked.	Karna
did	not	answer.
“What	did	Shakuni	say	to	you?”	Suyodhana	asked.
“It	 was	 my	 fault,	 my	 ego.	 I	 cannot	 blame	 anyone.	 He	 only	 said	 that	 even	 in
women’s	dress,	Arjuna	looked	every	bit	a	Kshatriya.”
Suyodhana	 and	 Aswathama	 exchanged	 glances.	 Had	 Shakuni	 resumed	 his
devious	 games	 of	 manipulation	 or	 was	 it	 just	 an	 innocent	 remark	 that	 had
provoked	 the	 sensitive	 Karna?	 How	 could	 they	 blame	 Shakuni?	 Thus	 far,	 his
planning	had	been	faultless	–	whether	it	was	the	game	of	dice	or	the	invasion
of	Virata.
“Your	body	armour	saved	you	from	certain	death,	Karna,	as	also	the	efforts	of
Bhishma	and	Drona.	It	does	not	matter.	We	have	won.	The	Pandavas	will	have
to	 repeat	 13	 years	 of	 exile.	 Virata	 was	 the	 last	 battle	 with	 them,”	 Suyodhana
said,	smiling	at	his	friend.
Aswathama	clicked	his	tongue.	Virata,	the	last	battle	with	the	Pandavas?	He	was
not	so	sure.
***
Shakuni	 spent	 the	 whole	 day	 roaming	 in	 the	 jungle	 to	 find	 Dhaumya	 and	 his

cronies.	 He	 had	 seen	 them	 rushing	 to	 Virata	 after	 the	 battle	 and	 had	 patiently
waited	for	them	to	return.	He	finally	found	the	forlorn	group	of	Brahmins	at
the	 edge	 of	 the	 Virata	 forest.	 Guru	 Dhaumya	 was	 sitting	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the
group	 with	 his	 head	 buried	 in	 his	 hands.	 His	 disciples	 stood	 with	 their	 gaze
fixed	on	their	feet.
Shakuni	 had	 wandered	 long	 enough	 to	 look	 sufficiently	 distressed.	 He
removed	his	headgear	and	ruffled	his	hair	and	beard.	He	tore	his	angavastra,
threw	 one	 of	 his	 shoes	 away,	 and	 taking	 his	 dagger	 from	 his	 waistband,	 cut
himself	 in	 a	 few	 places.	 He	 had	 to	 look	 like	 he	 was	 running	 from	 the
battlefield.	 Then	 he	 slumped	 limply	 over	 his	 horse’s	 back	 and	 nudged	 it
towards	the	group.
*****

42			DATES	OF	DESTINY
	
“A	 WARRIOR	 IS	 COMING	 TOWARDS	 US!”	 Shakuni	heard	the	excited	shout	from	one

of	 Dhaumya’s	 disciples.	 He	 closed	 his	 eyes.	 The	 horse	 carried	 him	 to	 the
group,	 where	 he	 collapsed	 to	 the	 ground.	 Dozens	 of	 Dhaumya’s	 disciples
crowded	over	him.	In	a	faint	voice,	Shakuni	cried	for	water.
Water	 hit	 his	 face	 and	 he	 woke	 artistically,	 as	 if	 from	 a	 stupor.	 His	 gaze
scanned	 every	 face	 and	 stopped	 at	 Dhaumya.	 “Guru	 Dhaumya,	 please...do	 not
kill	me.”
“Shakuni,	 you	 Mlecha...	 what	 are	 you	 doing	 here?”	 Dhaumya	 cried	 as	 his
disciples	moved	away	in	shock.	They	had	thought	the	warrior	they	had	given
water	 to	 was	 a	 true	 Kshatriya.	 But	 this	 was	 a	 Mlecha,	 and	 his	 touch	 would
pollute	them.
“Everything	 is	 lost,	 Guru,”	 Shakuni	 cried	 in	 abject	 misery.	 “Arjuna	 has
destroyed	everything.	He	has	defeated	my	poor	nephew	and	killed	Karna.	We
have	lost	everything.	Have	mercy	on	me	when	Yudhishtra	rules	this	land.	I	will
go	to	my	own	country.	Do	not	punish	me.”
Dhaumya	 looked	 at	 his	 disciples	 in	 surprise.	 Was	 the	 Mlecha	 making	 fun	 of
them?	 “Stop	 drivelling,	 you	barbarian.	Arjuna	did	not	kill	anyone.	He	spared
the	 lives	 of	 all	 those	 evil	 men	 because	 he	 respects	 Drona	 and	 Bhishma,”
Dhaumya	 spat	 in	 disgust.	 “It	 is	 we	 who	 should	 be	 crying.	 The	 Pandavas	 have
lost	the	game.	They	have	been	found	before	their	time	in	exile	is	up.”
“So	another	thirteen	years	of	wilderness	for	my	nephew’s	enemies?”	Shakuni
asked	slowly,	eyeing	Dhaumya	from	the	corner	of	his	eye.
“Stop	 rejoicing,	 evil	 Mlecha.	 We	 will	 find	 a	 way,”	 Dhaumya	 said,	 his	 voice
harsh	with	loathing.

“What	choice	do	you	have,	Guru?	You	follow	the	solar	calendar.	In	Gandhara,
we	follow	the	lunar	calendar.”	Shakuni	coughed	to	add	effect.	He	looked	at	the
Priest	humbly,	watching	to	see	whether	he	had	taken	the	hint.
Dhaumya’s	face	lightened.	“What	are	you	saying,	you	Mlecha?”
“Had	 you	 people	 followed	 the	 lunar	 calendar,	 the	 days	 of	 exile	 would	 have
ended	long	ago.	But	alas...”	Shakuni	shook	his	head,	trying	to	get	up	from	the
floor.
Dhaumya	turned	to	whisper	to	his	disciples.	Shakuni	could	feel	their	growing
excitement.	 The	 Guru	 had	 taken	 the	 bait.	 Dhaumya	 and	 his	 cronies	 hurried
away	without	even	casting	a	glance	at	him.	Shakuni	hoped	they	were	going	to
meet	the	Pandavas,	or	better	still,	Krishna.	He	sighed	with	relief.	He	had	given
the	 Pandavas	 a	 small	 leaf	 to	 cover	 the	 shame	 of	 their	 blatant	 demand	 for	 the
throne,	 despite	 having	 lost	 the	 bet.	 Suyodhana	 would	 be	 livid.	 Shakuni	 could
not	repress	a	smile.	The	Indians	would	now	fight	over	calendars.	Shakuni	felt
he	was	closer	to	his	goal	now	than	at	any	other	time	in	his	life.	Dharmayudha,	a
bloody	 holy	 war	 would	 destroy	 everything.	 The	 priests	 would	 justify	 it,	 the
Kurus	would	think	it	was	their	duty	to	shoot	down	their	blood	relatives,	fathers
would	kill	sons,	 uncles	their	 nephews	–	the	 whole	country	would	be	damned.
‘Gandhara,	 I	 will	 not	 disappoint	 you	 again.	 Krishna,	 you	 think	 you	 are	 an
avatar,	but	you	are	just	a	cowri	on	my	board.’
***
Yudhishtra	 had	 a	 faraway	 look	 in	 his	 eyes.	 He	 felt	 deeply	 relieved	 that	 there
would	be	no	war	now,	even	though	it	meant	another	thirteen	years	in	exile.	But
their	 failure	 to	 remain	 incognito	 in	 the	 last	 fortnight	 of	 their	 long	 exile	 had
been	 a	 devastating	 blow.	 They	 had	 come	 so	 close	 to	 being	 free.	 Everyone
blamed	him.	‘What	choice	did	I	have?’	he	wanted	to	ask	Draupadi,	but	feared
what	 he	 would	 hear	 in	 reply.	 They	 were	 sitting	 in	 the	 woods	 near	 the	 Virata
palace.	All	his	brothers	looked	gloomy	and	irritated.	He	had	failed	them	again.
“Don’t	worry	about	the	extended	exile.	You	have	suffered	enough.	Go	and	ask
for	your	share	of	the	kingdom,	Yudhishtra,”	he	heard	Krishna	say.
Share?	What	share?	Yudhishtra	wished	Krishna	would	go	away	and	leave	him

alone.	 He	 heard	 Draupadi’s	 derisive	 laughter.	 What	 right	 had	 he	 to
Suyodhana’s	empire?	He	was	the	bastard	son	of	an	ambitious	mother.	Was	that
a	claim?	Had	 he	been	in	Suyodhana’s	position,	would	he	have	cared	to	share
power	 with	 a	 bastard	 cousin?	 Perhaps.	 After	 the	 long	 years	 in	 the	 forest,
Yudhishtra	 had	 lost	 interest	 in	 fighting	 for	 revenge.	 Life	 had	 been	 calm	 and
peaceful.	 He	 was	 tired	 of	 power	 games.	 Then	 why	 had	 he	 ordered	 Arjuna	 to
save	the	cows	of	Virata	when	he	heard	of	Suyodhana’s	adventure?	He	was	all
too	 aware	 of	 the	 terms	 of	 their	 exile,	 yet	 he	 had	 exposed	 them	 all.	 Yet	 how
could	 he	 have	 remained	 a	 mute	 spectator	 when	 holy	 cows	 were	 being	 hurt?
Had	 power	 changed	 Suyodhana	 so	 much	 that	 the	 boy	 who	 cried	 over	 a	 slain
parrot	 did	 not	 hesitate	 to	 slaughter	 cows?	 Yudhishtra	 realised	 now	 that
Suyodhana	had	never	intended	to	kill	the	cows;	it	had	been	a	trap	to	lure	them
out	of	hiding	and	he	had	fallen	into	it.
“No,	I	cannot	do	it,”	he	said	to	Krishna.	The	Yadava	shook	his	head	and	walked
away.
Dhaumya	was	waiting	near	the	tree	where	Krishna	had	tied	his	horse.	He	and
his	disciples	immediately	surrounded	the	Yadava,	clamouring	for	his	attention.
“He	refuses	to	fight,	saying	it	is	adharma	to	break	the	conditions	of	exile.	I	do
not	 know	 how	 to	 convince	 him	 otherwise,”	 Krishna	 told	 the	 Brahmins	 as	 he
untied	his	horse.
“There	is	a	way,”	Dhaumya	said,	a	smug	smile	on	his	round	face.
Krishna	turned	around,	one	hand	on	the	bridle.	He	saw	the	eager	anticipation
on	 the	 faces	 of	 Dhaumya’s	 disciples	 as	 their	 Guru	 whispered	 his	 plan.
Krishna’s	eyebrows	flew	up	and	a	dazzling	smile	spread	over	his	face.
“Guru,	it	is	brilliant.	I	did	not	know	you	were	such	a	strategist.	It	is	inspired.
Genius!”	Krishna	exclaimed	in	genuine	admiration.
“Anything	 for	 the	 victory	 of	 dharma,	 My	 Lord,”	 Dhaumya	 said,	 bowing	 his
head.
“I	think	I	can	convince	Yudhishtra	with	this	argument.”	Krishna	quickly	walked
back	to	the	clearing	where	the	Pandavas	still	sat	despondently.

Dhaumya	 and	 his	 disciples	 followed.	 When	 they	 had	 disappeared	 among	 the
trees,	Shakuni	emerged	from	the	shadowy	woodland.	He	clicked	his	tongue	to
turn	 his	 horse.	 It	 was	 time	 for	 the	 next	 move.	 It	 was	 time	 to	 tell	 Suyodhana
about	Ekalavya’s	murder.	Shakuni’s	horse	galloped	through	the	parched	forest
towards	Hastinapura.
*****

43			MURDER
	
A	 GUARD	 ENTERED	 TO	 INFORM 	Suyodhana	that	Prince	Krishna	awaited	him.	The

Crown	 Prince	 took	 leave	 of	 Karna	 and	 hurried	 towards	 the	 Sabha.	 Why	 had
Krishna	 come	 all	 the	 way	 from	 Dwaraka	 to	 see	 him?	 Aswathama	 ran	 behind
his	 friend,	 whispering	 a	 quick	 warning	 not	 to	 be	 taken	 in	 by	 the	 charming
Yadava.	They	were	about	to	enter	the	hall	when	Shakuni	too,	appeared.	He	had
been	waiting	for	them	in	the	shadows.
“Later,	uncle.	Krishna	is	in	the	Sabha.”
“Suyodhana,	 I	 have	 some	 terrible	 news.”	 Shakuni’s	 grave	 voice	 made	 them
stop	and	look	at	him.	“Ekalavya	is	dead.”
“What?”	Suyodhana	and	Aswathama	exclaimed	in	unison.
“Killed!	Murdered	in	cold	blood.”
“Who	killed	him?”	Aswathama	asked.
Shakuni’s	 expression	 became	 sombre.	 “I	 don’t	 know	 who	 did	 it,	 but	 I	 heard
about	his	murder	from	a	group	of	tribals.	They	found	his	rotting	body.	Vidhura
helped	them	bury	it.”
Suyodhana	held	on	to	a	pillar	for	support.	That	was	the	reason	the	Nishada	had
not	turned	up	for	his	daughter ’s	wedding.	How	was	he	going	to	break	the	news
to	Lakshmana?
“How	do	you	know	he	was	killed?”	Aswathama	asked.
“I	can	only	recount	what	I	heard.	His	skull	was	split	open,	as	if	he	had	been	hit
with	 a	 stone	 or	 something	 blunt.	 There	 are	 rumours	 floating	 around	 that
Krishna	murdered	Ekalavya.”

“You	are	just	speculating,”	Aswathama’s	voice	was	stiff	with	disdain.
“How	can	I	know	for	certain	since	I	was	not	there?”	Shakuni	retorted.
“I	 would	 rather	 not	 meet	 Krishna	 today.	 This	 news	 of	 Ekalavya’s	 death...”
Suyodhana	said	quietly.
“I	 don’t	 think	 you	 have	 a	 choice,	 nephew.	 Krishna	 has	 come	 with	 a	 message
from	Yudhishtra,”	Shakuni	said.
“I	smell	trouble,”	Aswathama	stated	with	finality.
“Come,	 let	 us	 hear	 what	 Krishna	 has	 to	 say,”	 suggested	 Shakuni	 and	 turned
towards	the	Sabha.
Krishna	stood	in	the	centre	of	the	great	hall,	a	smile	on	his	lips.	Suyodhana’s
grip	on	his	sword	tightened.	There	would	be	no	compromise	with	his	cousins
and	their	extended	exile,	or	with	the	man	who	had	murdered	Ekalavya.
Krishna’s	 eyes	 glinted	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 Shakuni.	 Bhishma	 sat	 grim-faced.	 King
Dhritarashtra	waited,	twisting	the	rudraksha	beads	he	habitually	wore	round	his
wrist.	What	did	the	Yadava	have	to	say?
Before	 Krishna	 could	 speak,	 Suyodhana	 said	 in	 a	 voice	 from	 which	 all
emotion	had	fled,	“Ekalavya	is	dead.”	The	Sabha	froze	in	shock.
“How	did	he	die?”	Dhritarashtra	asked,	stunned	by	the	news,	his	fingers	frozen
on	the	beads	he	had	been	turning.
It	 was	 clear	 from	 his	 impassive	 face	 that	 it	 was	 not	 news	 to	 Bhishma.	 Drona
looked	up,	overcome	by	a	sudden	sense	of	guilt	and	loss.	The	fearless	boy	who
had	 chopped	 off	 his	 thumb	 as	 his	 gurudakshina,	 flashed	 before	 his	 eyes.	 His
heart	 acknowledged	 in	 silence	 that	 there	 had	 never	 been	 an	 archer	 to	 equal
Ekalavya.
Suyodhana	 watched	 Krishna,	 his	 eyes	 never	 leaving	 that	 handsome	 face,	 his
eyes	quenched	of	their	usual	burning	fire.	The	Yadava	stood	alone	in	the	centre
of	the	Sabha,	looking	from	Shakuni	to	Suyodhana,	weighing	his	options.

*****

44 			THE	MESSENGER
	
“I	KILLED	THE	NISHADA,”	 said	Krishna,	each	word	falling	into	the	stillness	of	the

Sabha	with	the	force	of	thunder.
Suyodhana	drew	his	sword	and	rushed	towards	Krishna	in	speechless	rage,	but
Aswathama	 restrained	 him,	 with	 both	 arms	 around	 his	 friend’s	 trembling
frame.
“Suyodhana,	 if	 I	 had	 not	 killed	 the	 Nishada,	 your	 daughter	 would	 have
remained	 unmarried.	 I	 killed	 him	 to	 save	 my	 son,”	 Krishna	 said,	 drawing	 an
almost	imperceptible	nod	from	Bhishma.
Suyodhana	did	not	miss	the	gesture	and	his	rage	exploded	into	angry	words.	“I
made	a	great	mistake	in	permitting	my	daughter	to	marry	your	degenerate	son,
Krishna.	It	was	not	Ekalavya	who	deserved	to	die,	but	your	son.	How	dare	you
come	here	and	declare	your	guilt	before	us	all?”
“To	kill	evil	is	my	dharma,”	Krishna	said	softly.
“You	 kill	 whoever	 you	 please	 and	 then	 claim	 your	 victim	 is	 evil.	 Is	 that
dharma?”	Suyodhana’s	voice	shook	with	all	the	emotion	he	had	buried	in	his
heart	since	he	had	watched	his	beloved	daughter	being	carried	home	in	Karna’s
arms,	battered	and	deflowered.
“Suyodhana,”	 Bhishma	 stood	 up.	 “Let	 us	 hear	 why	 Krishna	 has	 taken	 the
trouble	to	visit	us.	He	has	come	with	a	request	from	Yudhishtra,	as	I	surmise,”
he	said	in	the	calm	voice	of	reason.
“There	 is	 nothing	 to	 discuss,	 Pitamaha.	 The	 Pandavas	 must	 extend	 their	 exile
for	another	thirteen	years.	You	yourself	fixed	the	terms.	I	do	not	wish	to	talk	to
this	manipulative	man.”

Aswathama	put	a	hand	on	Suyodhana’s	shoulder,	urging	him	to	sit	down.
“I	regret	the	Crown	Prince	prefers	to	place	his	own	emotions	before	the	good
of	his	country,”	said	Krishna	calmly.
“You	killed	my	friend...”	Suyodhana	gazed	at	Krishna	with	loathing.
Bhishma	intervened	again.	“This	is	neither	the	time	nor	the	place	to	discuss	the
Nishada’s	 death.	 We	 are	 here	 for	 something	 important	 and	 are	 duty-bound	 to
hear	the	respected	messenger.”
“Pitamaha,	Ekalavya	was	not	just	any	Nishada...”
“Do	not	drag	me	into	your	petty	squabbles,	Suyodhana.	I	am	here	because	King
Dhritarashtra	requested	my	presence.	Now	let	us	hear	what	Krishna	has	to	say,”
Bhishma	said	with	utter	finality.
“Your	 Highness,	 with	 your	 gracious	 permission,”	 Krishna	 said,	 bowing	 to
Dhritarashtra,	 “Prince	 Yudhishtra	 has	 sent	 me	 to	 stake	 claim	 to	 half	 the
empire.”	There	was	pindrop	silence	in	the	Sabha.
Suyodhana	 sprang	 up	 like	 a	 man	 possessed.	 “That	 is	 pre-posterous!”	 he
shouted,	shoving	away	Aswathama’s	restraining	hand.
“Suyodhana,	 it	 would	 become	 you	 to	 display	 some	 of	 the	 dignity	 attached	 to
your	exalted	station.	The	Sabha	is	here	to	listen	and	to	respond,”	Bhishma	said
in	a	voice	that	allowed	no	argument.	He	turned	to	Krishna.	“As	per	the	terms	of
exile,	 the	 Pandavas	 are	 required	 to	 repeat	 their	 twelve-year	 stay	 in	 the	 forest
and	 one	 year	 incognito.	 It	 is	 perhaps	 unfortunate	 they	 were	 discovered	 just	 a
few	days	short	of	their	term.”
“Revered	 Lord	 Bhishma,”	 Krishna	 said,	 his	 charming	 smile	 once	 again
lighting	up	his	face,	“they	were	never	found	during	their	exile.”
“That	 is	 absurd!”	 protested	 Suyodhana.	 “We	 were	 all	 there	 at	 Virata.	 We	 saw
them	with	our	own	eyes.”
“The	Pandavas	were	never	found	during	their	period	of	exile.	They	came	out
to	fight	Suyodhana	after	it	had	ended.	In	fact,	Arjuna	defeated	the	Hastinapura

forces,	which	means	the	entire	empire	now	belongs	to	Yudhishtra	by	right.”
“Enough!”	Suyodhana	was	on	his	feet,	trembling	with	rage.
“I	request	you	to	hear	me	out.	While	I	understand	Suyodhana’s	sentiments,	the
truth	cannot	remain	hidden,”	Krishna	stated	calmly.
“Let	him	speak,”	Dhritarashtra	commanded.
Krishna	 smiled	 at	 Suyodhana	 and	 then	 turned	 towards	 Bhishma.	 “Sir,
Suyodhana	is	right,	but	the	Pandavas	are	more	right.”
“Krishna,	pray,	do	not	speak	in	riddles,”	Bhishma	implored,	trying	to	conceal
his	irritation.
“Your	 Excellency,	 allow	 me	 to	 explain.	 In	 Bharatavarsha,	 two	 calendars	 are
used	–	the	lunar	and	the	solar.	When	Suyodhana	says	the	Pandavas	were	found
before	 their	 period	 of	 exile	 was	 over,	 he	 is	 referring	 to	 the	 solar	 calendar.
When	 Yudhishtra	 says	 the	 Pandavas	 had	 completed	 their	 thirteen	 years,	 he	 is
referring	 to	 the	 lunar	 calendar.	 Both	 are	 right,	 but	 the	 Pandavas	 are	 more
right.”
“Absolute	nonsense!	Pitamaha,	Krishna	is	up	to	his	usual	tricks.”	Suyodhana’s
voice	shook	with	fury.
“Revered	 Lord	 Bhishma,	 does	 the	 Kuru	 dynasty	 trace	 its	 lineage	 from	 the
Moon	or	the	Sun?”	Krishna	asked	humbly.
Angry	 murmurs	 rose	 in	 the	 Sabha.	 The	 Kurus	 traced	 their	 lineage	 from	 the
Moon,	hence	they	were	known	as	Chandravamshis.
“The	Kurus	have	followed	the	solar	calendar	for	many	generations.	The	lunar
calendar	 is	 used	 only	 for	ekadashi	 fasts	 and	 on	 other	 auspicious	 occasions,”
Bhishma	said.
“Since	the	Kuru	dynasty	uses	the	lunar	calendar	for	all	auspicious	occasions,	it
is	the	more	important	of	the	two.	The	Pandavas	are	thus	more	in	the	right.	Let
us	begin	negotiations	from	that	point,”	Krishna	said,	as	if	he	was	proposing	the
most	logical	thing	in	the	world.

“There	 is	 nothing	 to	 negotiate.	 We	 will	 not	 be	 taken	 in	 by	 devious	 tricks,
Krishna.”	Suyodhana	pointed	a	damning	finger	at	the	smiling	Yadava.
“I	request	to	be	allowed	to	state	the	terms,”	Krishna	said,	ignoring	Suyodhana
completely.
Before	 Suyodhana	 could	 protest,	 Dhritarashtra	 said,	 “You	 have	 come	 as	 a
messenger	 and	 custom	 dictates	 you	 be	 allowed	 to	 speak	 without	 fear.
Suyodhana,	be	seated	and	listen	to	what	Krishna	has	to	say.”
Suyodhana	 sat	 down	 without	 taking	 his	 gaze	 off	 Krishna’s	 face.	 From	 the
corner	 of	 his	 eye	 he	 noticed	 Shakuni.	 Something	 was	 wrong.	 Had	 a	 smile
flashed	across	that	face?	He	turned	and	looked	at	his	uncle.	No,	perhaps	he	had
been	mistaken;	Shakuni’s	face	showed	only	concern.
“Yudhishtra	 is	 prepared	 to	 give	 half	 the	 kingdom	 to	 Suyodhana,”	 Krishna
began.	The	entire	Sabha	rose	in	agitation.
“Respected	Krishna,”	Bhishma’s	deep	voice	rose	over	the	din,	“please	bear	in
mind	that	the	claim	to	the	throne	has	yet	to	be	settled.	We	already	have	a	King
sitting	on	the	throne	of	Hastinapura.”
“My	 apologies,	 revered	 Lord	 Bhishma,	 it	 was	 but	 a	 slip	 of	 the	 tongue.	 I	 beg
your	 pardon,	 Your	 Highness.	 May	 I	 carry	 a	 message	 to	 Yudhishtra	 that	 the
King	has	graciously	agreed	to	divide	the	empire	into	two,	between	his	own	son
and	his	brother ’s	son?”
“Enough	of	this	drivel!”	Suyodhana	said	in	a	voice	that	was	as	cold	as	it	was
clear.	“My	father	is	the	King	and	I	am	his	firstborn	son.	There	is	no	question	of
dividing	the	kingdom	or	sharing	it	with	a	gambler.”
“Yudhishtra	is	prepared	to	make	a	concession:	when	he	says	half	the	kingdom,
he	 does	 not	 include	 the	 expanded	 empire	 Karna	 won	 for	 Hastinapura.	 The
Pandavas	 will	 settle	 for	 Indraprastha	 and	 the	 city	 they	 themselves	 built.”
Krishna’s	face	was	impassive.
“Indraprastha!	The	city	built	on	the	bones	of	slain	Nagas?	The	city	Maya	and
his	people	were	thrown	out	of,	according	to	the	tenets	of	varna	and	jati?	The
city	 its	 ruler	 gambled	 away,	 and	 where	 I	 stood	 naked	 and	 abused?	 How	 does

Yudhishtra	even	dare	to	ask	to	be	its	ruler?	If	he	is	as	righteous	as	he	claims,	let
him	follow	the	conditions	of	the	dice	game	as	they	were	laid	down,	and	go	into
exile	for	another	thirteen	years.”
“Prince	Suyodhana,	that	is	unfair.	What	you	suggest	is	adharma.”
“You	 Yadava	 should	 be	 the	 last	 person	 to	 preach	dharma.	 I	 know	 what	 your
dharma	 is	 and	 I	 know	 what	 you	 mean	 by	 adharma.	 If	 you	 are	 an	 avatar	 of
Vishnu	 as	 you	 claim,	 then	 it	 is	 you	 who	 dwells	 in	 my	 heart	 and	 I	 follow	 my
heart.	That	is	my	dharma.	Krishna,	when	have	you	 ever	been	fair	 to	anyone?
Were	 you	 fair	 to	 Jarasandha,	 to	 Sisupala,	 to	 Hiranyadhanus,	 to	 the	 thousands
who	died	in	Khandivaprastha?	Were	you	fair	to	Ekalavya?”	Suyodhana	asked,
pointing	a	shaking	finger	at	Krishna.
The	 Yadava	 turned	 to	 Bhishma.	 “I	 am	 merely	 trying	 to	 avoid	 a	 war,	 but
Suyodhana	 is	 intractable.	 The	 voice	 of	 reason	 cannot	 reach	 deaf	 ears.	 The
Pandavas	 will	 settle	 for	 a	 vassal	 kingdom	 and	 the	 same	 rank	 Karna	 holds	 as
King	of	Anga.”
“So	they	can	impose	their	rules?	So	that	Dhaumya	and	others	like	him	become
unquestionable?”	Suyodhana	thundered.
“Five	villages	will	also	do,”	Krishna	added	in	a	soft	voice.
“So	they	can	kindle	a	revolution	from	there?”
“You	 are	 making	 peace	 impossible,	 Suyodhana.	 Have	 a	 care	 what	 you	 do	 in
such	 unthinking	 anger	 and	 haste,”	 said	 Krishna,	 his	 voice	 losing	 some	 of	 its
calm.	“This	is	the	final	offer:	Yudhishtra	will	settle	for	a	house.”
“Krishna,	we	gave	them	a	house	years	ago.	In	fact,	we	gave	them	a	palace.	All
those	present	in	this	Sabha	will	remember	what	the	sons	of	dharma	and	their
pious	mother	did	with	it.	We	were	left	to	deal	with	the	widows	of	the	soldiers
they	 trapped	 and	 killed	 in	 the	 palace	 fire.	 It	 might	 be	 a	 minor	 detail	 that	 they
also	 baited	 a	 Nishada	 woman	 and	 her	 five	 children	 with	 food	 and	 then	 burnt
them	 alive.	 These	 are	 perhaps	 small	 footnotes	 in	 the	 glorious	 stories	 of
dharma,”	Suyodhana	said,	his	voice	dying	into	silence.	Many	heads	nodded	in
agreement.

“Suyodhana,	 power	 has	 gone	 to	 your	 head	 and	 you	 cannot	 discern	 between
right	and	wrong,”	Krishna	said	succinctly.
“Stop!	Not	another	word	from	you,	you	cunning	Yadava.	Remember,	you	are
standing	 in	 the	 Hastinapura	 Sabha.	 You	 accuse	 me	 of	 being	 power	 hungry?
What	about	you?	You	are	using	the	Pandavas	and	their	gullibility	to	finish	off
your	enemies.	Tell	me	why	I	should	share	my	birthright	with	the	bastard	sons
of	my	aunts?”
“Suyodhana!”	 Bhishma	 stood	 up,	 trembling	 with	 anger.	 “Mind	 what	 you	 say.
You	were	not	raised	in	the	gutter.	Krishna	is	our	guest...”
“What	 have	 I	 said	 that	 is	 untrue,	 Pitamaha?	 What	 right	 have	 the	 Pandavas	 to
claim	the	throne?”
“Suyodhana,	it	would	have	served	you	better	if	you	had	studied	the	history	of
the	Kuru	race	more	closely	instead	of	absenting	yourself	from	your	classes,”
Krishna	said	with	a	mocking	smile.	“The	revered	sage,	Veda	Vyasa,	would	no
doubt	 have	 had	 the	 answers	 to	 your	 questions.	 He	 would	 perhaps	 have	 asked
you	 who	 the	 father	 of	 respected	 King	 Dhritarashtra,	 revered	 Pandu	 and
mahatma	 Vidhura	 was.	 It	 may	 have	 helped	 you	 to	 understand	 Yudhishtra’s
claim.”
There	was	an	edgy	hush	in	the	Sabha.
“Don’t	 try	 to	 corner	 me	 with	 the	 custom	 of	niyoga.	 Sage	 Veda	 Vyasa	 is	 our
grandfather	and	we	are	proud	of	it.	The	niyoga	was	done	with	the	blessings	of
the	elders	and	not	surreptitiously	in	the	jungle,	as	in	the	case	of	my	aunts,	Kunti
and	Madri.	Can	Yudhishtra	point	to	any	man	and	say,	‘Here	is	my	father ’?	It	is
claimed	that	Yudhishtra	is	the	son	of	Yama,	the	God	of	Death;	Bhima,	the	son
of	Vayu,	the	God	of	the	Winds;	Arjuna,	the	son	of	Indra,	King	of	the	Gods;	and
Nakula	and	Sahadeva,	the	sons	of	the	Gods	of	Dawn	and	Dusk.	Do	you	think
we	are	naive	enough	to	believe	such	bizarre	stories?	Do	you?”
“You	have	one	last	opportunity	to	avoid	a	bloody	war	and	the	total	annihilation
of	your	race,	Duryodhana,”	Krishna	said,	his	lips	smiling,	but	his	eyes	burning
with	anger.

“Are	you	threatening	me,	you	cowherd?”
“You	do	not	know	who	I	am.”
“I	know	who	you	are,	and	I	am	not	one	of	those	naive	women	of	Vrindavana	to
fall	prey	to	your	charms.	You	have	an	agenda	and	you	use	words	like	 dharma
to	cloak	your	evil	intent.	I	am	not	afraid	of	war.	If	that	is	to	be,	so	be	it.	Hear
this,	 Yadava,	 go	 and	 tell	 my	 aunt’s	 sons	 that	 I	 will	 not	 give	 them	 even	 a	 tiny
portion	of	the	earth	which	legitimately	belongs	to	me,	not	even	the	space	to	jab
a	needle.”
The	Sabha	erupted	into	an	uproar.	War	was	now	certain.
“Arrest	 the	 Yadava,”	 Suyodhana	 said	 calmly.	 The	 din	 in	 the	 Sabha	 became
deafening.
Krishna	 smiled	 at	 the	 Crown	 Prince.	 “Duryodhana,	 it	 is	 time	 for	 you	 to	 see
who	 I	 am.”	 There	 was	 a	 blaze	 of	 light,	 as	 though	 something	 had	 exploded.
Krishna	 said,	 “King	 Dhritarashtra,	 your	 son	 will	 ruin	 this	 kingdom	 and	 take
everyone	to	their	doom.	He	is	leading	your	people	to	annihilation.	He	does	not
know	whom	he	is	speaking	to,	nor	what	he	is	saying.	He	is	walking	the	path	of
adharma.	 The	 war	 will	 finish	 your	 line.	 Be	 warned	 and	 beware.	 He	 is
challenging	the	will	of	God.	Know	that	I	am	Death	and	I	am	Life.	I	am	Time
and	I	am	Timelessness.	I	am	the	Beginning	and	the	End.	I	am	Brahma,	Vishnu
and	Shiva.	Behold	my	glory.”
Suyodhana	watched	impassively	as	many	people	in	the	Sabha	fell	to	their	knees
and	bowed	to	Krishna.	What	was	it	they	saw	in	him	that	he	did	not?	It	was	just
Krishna	up	to	his	usual	tricks.	Enough	of	this	charade,	Suyodhana	decided.
“Enough	of	your	street	magic,	Yadava!	You	are	nothing	but	a	charlatan.	Whom
are	you	threatening?	If	there	is	a	war,	so	be	it.	If	I	die,	I	will	go	to	a	warrior ’s
heaven,	 like	 a	 true	 Kshatriya.	 But	 I	 will	 not	 hand	 over	 the	 kingdom	 to	 a
gambler.”
Suyodhana	smiled	when	he	saw	that	Krishna	was	at	a	loss	for	words.	Perhaps
the	 Yadava	 was	 wondering	 why	 his	 famed	 Vishwaroopa	 act	 had	 failed	 to
impress.	 What	 had	 he	 to	 fear	 when	 he	 had	 men	 like	 Karna	 and	 Aswathama

beside	him?	Why	claim	to	be	a	God	and	then	commit	unspeakable	acts?	It	was
better	to	be	just	a	man	and	die	for	one’s	beliefs	and	convictions	with	the	head
held	high.
“Duryodhana,	 you	 will	 pay	 dearly	 for	 this.	 Not	 just	 you,	 but	 this	 entire	 Kuru
Sabha	 and	 everyone	 in	 this	 country.	 The	 voices	 that	 remained	 silent	 when	 a
woman’s	honour	was	dragged	through	mud	in	this	very	chamber,	remain	silent
even	 now.	 It	 is	 for	 the	 best	 that	 you	 did	 not	 agree	 to	 the	 terms,	 since	 future
generations	would	have	said	that	I	compromised	with	evil.	Men	of	the	Sabha,
hear	 my	 words...this	 man	 has	 brought	 war	 upon	 you	 and	 nothing,	 I	 repeat,
nothing	 is	 going	 to	 save	 you.	 Remember	 I	 warned	 you	 of	 what	 awaits	 you,”
Krishna	thundered	at	the	dumbstruck	Sabha.
“Arrest	this	charlatan!”	Suyodhana	barked	at	the	guards.
Jerked	from	their	stupefaction,	the	guards	rushed	towards	Krishna.	He	dodged
them	 with	 ridiculous	 ease,	 knocking	 them	 down.	 Smiling	 at	 Suyodhana,
Krishna	walked	out	of	the	Hastinapura	Sabha	as	if	retiring	after	a	friendly	chat
with	friends.
The	Sabha	emptied	as	courtiers	dispersed	in	animated	groups	to	discuss	what
had	transpired.	In	the	hubbub	that	ensued,	Yuyutsu	moved	towards	the	stunned
Crown	Prince,	who	had	yet	to	come	to	terms	with	the	realisation	that	war	was
inevitable.
“Brother,	 I	 have	 some	 important	 things	 to	 discuss	 with	 you,”	 Yuyutsu	 said.
Suyodhana	 looked	 up	 at	 the	 merchant’s	 smiling	 face	 and	 knew	 his	 troubles
were	just	beginning.
“What	of	the	deal	I	had	enquired	about?”	Yuyutsu	asked.
“This	is	neither	the	time	nor	the	place,”	Suyodhana	said,	irritated.
“It	 is	 always	 a	 good	 time	 to	 talk	 business.	 My	 dues	 are	 long	 pending.	 This
country	owes	me	money,	a	lot	of	money,	Suyodhana.”
“The	 treasury	 is	 almost	 empty,	 but	 you	 are	 collecting	 taxes	 and	 tolls.	 What
more	do	you	want?”

Yuyutsu	chuckled,	“There	is	nothing	much	to	collect	these	days,	little	brother.
Your	country	is	poor.”
“There	is	drought.	Once	the	rains	come,	everything	will	be	alright.”
“Before	the	rains,	war	will	come	and	then	what	will	happen	to	my	money?	It	is
all	the	more	important	that	I	secure	my	money	now.	Do	you	want	me	to	broker
a	deal	with	the	Pandavas?”	Yuyutsu	asked.
“You	will	be	paid	after	the	war.”
“Hmm,	 how	 sure	 you	 are	 of	 victory!	 But	 I	 am	 not	 so	 confident,	 I	 want	 my
money	now!”
“You	 scoundrel!	 Have	 you	 no	 sense	 of	 gratitude	 or	 obligation	 to	 your
country?”	Suyodhana	trembled	with	frustration.
“I	am	only	following	my	dharma.	My	duty	is	to	trade,”	Yuyutsu	said,	rubbing
his	 thumb	 with	 his	 index	 finger.	 Overall,	 Suyodhana	 was	 a	 bad	 bet	 since
Krishna	was	supporting	the	Pandavas.	A	message	from	Parashurama	was	lying
safe	in	his	waistband.	By	siding	with	the	Pandavas,	he	was	taking	a	huge	risk,
but	Parashurama	had	promised	him	the	better	deal.	If	he	won	this	gamble,	he
would	not	be	trading	in	cloth	and	spices,	but	in	countries	and	kingdoms.
“Are	you	not	ashamed	to	make	such	demands	at	this	critical	time?”	Suyodhana
towered	over	Yuyutsu,	his	fists	clenched.
“I	 am	 beyond	 such	 emotions.	 I	 do	 not	 concern	 myself	 about	 results.
Detachment	 is	 my	 mantra,	 brother.”	 Yuyutsu	 emphasized	 the	 last	 word	 and
smiled.
“Do	not	dare	address	me	as	your	brother.”
“Are	you	afraid,	Prince?	Do	not	fret.	I	am	not	after	your	throne.	Pay	me	well,
pay	me	regularly,	and	I	will	govern	the	country	for	you.”
Suyodhana	punched	Yuyutsu	in	the	face.	The	fat	merchant	fell	in	a	heap	at	his
feet.	But	Yuyutsu	only	laughed	and	got	back	up.	With	provocative	slowness,	he
wiped	the	blood	from	his	nose.

“Don’t	stare	at	me	like	I	am	vermin.	It	is	I	who	own	this	palace	and	most	of	this
country,	my	dear	brother.”
“Get	out,	before	I	kill	you!”	Suyodhana	said	in	a	menacing	voice.
“Yudhishtra	is	a	more	business-friendly	ruler	than	you,	brother.”
“You	snake!”	Suyodhana	advanced	threateningly	upon	Yuyutsu.
“Money	can	buy	all	things,	brother,	even	bravery,	fame,	and	your	kingdom	and
its	little	people.”
Suyodhana	 shouted	 for	 the	 guards	 to	 escort	 Yuyutsu	 out.	 His	 half-brother
chuckled.	 Scores	 of	 Yuyutsu’s	 own	 soldiers	 appeared,	 surrounding	 him	 in	 a
protective	ring.
“Always	 looking	 for	 a	 fight,	 my	 little	 brother?	 You	 have	 no	 respect	 for
businessmen.	 I	 am	 now	 going	 to	 the	 Pandava	 side.	 Send	 word	 whenever	 you
want	me.	I	am	always	available	to	the	highest	bidder.”
Yuyutsu	walked	out	from	another	business	meeting.	In	one	stroke,	Suyodhana’s
armed	 strength	 had	 halved,	 while	 the	 Pandavas’	 had	 doubled.	 He	 should	 have
been	more	careful	with	his	words.	To	hell	with	it,	this	was	a	war	he	would	fight
alone	if	required,	he	told	himself.	When	he	looked	around,	he	was	alone.	The
cavernous	oppressiveness	of	the	hall	that	had	seen	many	intrigues	and	battles
was	suffocating.	Suyodhana	no	longer	felt	sure	of	the	future.
*****

45			WINDS	OF	WAR
	
“KRIPI,”	DRONA	CALLED	OUT	AS	HE	REACHED	HOME.	The	news	from	the	Sabha	had

shaken	him	to	the	core.	He	was	certain	there	would	now	be	a	war.	He	would	be
compelled	to	choose	between	his	son	and	his	beloved	disciple,	Arjuna.	If	only
he	could	make	Aswathama	see	reason	and	get	him	to	shift	allegiance.
Kripi	opened	the	door.	Seeing	his	grave,	troubled	face,	she	put	a	hand	on	his
arm,	 but	 Drona	 merely	 pushed	 her	 away	 with	 a	 grunt	 and	 walked	 to	 his	 puja
room.	 His	 sacred	 thread	 lay	 sweat-soaked	 across	 his	 chest.	 His	 mind	 seethed
like	an	ocean	in	a	storm.	He	prostrated	himself	before	the	idol	of	Shiva.	‘Lord
of	the	Universe,	show	me	the	right	path;	show	me	my	dharma.	Should	I	fight
beside	my	son	or	Arjuna?’
If	he	stood	by	Aswathama,	Drona	knew	he	would	have	to	give	his	support	to
Duryodhana,	whom	he	had	always	despised.	If	he	took	Arjuna’s	side,	he	would
have	to	fight	his	own	son.	‘What	is	my	dharma?	Have	I	not	been	the	most	pure
of	 Brahmins?	 Have	 I	 not	 followed	 all	 the	 rituals	 and	 conducted	 all	 the
ceremonial	sacrifices	expected	of	a	Brahmin	of	the	highest	lineage?’	Then	why
was	the	Lord	placing	such	an	impossible	choice	before	him?
Drona	heard	his	son	enter	the	house	and	mother	and	son	speak	in	whispers.	He
could	feel	his	son’s	eyes	burning	into	his	back.	Then	he	heard	Aswathama	slam
shut	the	door	of	his	room.	Drona	raised	his	head,	looked	at	the	idol	of	Shiva,
and	 gasped!	 Ekalavya!	 The	 untouchable	 was	 in	 his	 prayer	 room!	 How	 was	 it
possible	 when	 the	 Nishada	 was	 dead?	 Hadn’t	 Krishna	 said	 he	 had	 killed
Ekalavya?	Then	how	was	the	Nishada	standing	where	Shiva’s	idol	should	have
been?
Drona’s	 throat	 felt	 parched,	 his	 hands	 shivered.	 “Mahadeva,	 are	 you	 testing
me?	 Are	 you	 saying	 Ekalavya	 is	 immortal...that	 there	 is	 life	 beyond	 death?
Forgive	 this	 ignorant	 Brahmin.”	 Drona’s	 lips	 trembled	 as	 he	 mumbled	 the

Lord’s	name	repeatedly.	Gradually	peace	descended	on	him	like	a	gentle	balm.
Drona’s	 decision	 was	 made.	 He	 knew	 the	 side	 he	 would	 be	 on	 in	 the	 war.	 He
owed	it	to	the	Nishada,	whose	future	he	had	stolen.	He	owed	it	to	his	son.	It	was
his	dharma.
There	was	the	sound	of	excited	knocking	at	the	door.	Dhaumya’s	voice	called
to	him	from	the	street.	Reluctantly,	Drona	rose	from	his	prostrate	position	and
wiped	the	dust	from	his	forehead.	When	he	opened	the	door,	Dhaumya	entered,
grinning	 like	 a	 split	 watermelon.	 Drona	 offered	 the	 priest	 a	 seat	 and	 then	 sat
down	on	the	veranda	swing.	To	buy	time,	he	opened	his	paan	box,	took	out	two
leaves	and	started	filling	them	with	lime	and	betel	nut.
“Guru	Drona,	war	is	now	certain,”	Dhaumya	began.
Drona	nodded	in	silence,	offering	his	visitor	a	paan	before	pushing	the	other
into	a	corner	of	his	own	mouth.	He	pulled	the	spittoon	closer	and	then	said,	“I
was	at	the	Sabha	when	Krishna	spoke.”
“It	is	the	best	thing	that	could	have	happened,”	Dhaumya	said,	clearly	delighted.
He	 looked	 at	 the	 Guru	 in	 unabashed	 glee	 and	 then	 frowned	 when	 he	 saw
Drona’s	lack	of	enthusiasm.	“Duryodhana	will	be	finished...”
“Hmm...”
“All	the	Kauravas	will	die.”
“Hmm...”
“The	Suta	will	die.”
“Hmm...”
“Krishna’s	 Narayana	 Sena	 will	 support	 the	 Pandavas.	 The	 Southern
Confederate	 will	 declare	 their	 independence	 and	 join	 the	 Pandava	 cause.”
Dhaumya	counted	them	off	on	his	fingers.
“Perhaps.”	 Drona	 looked	 into	 the	 distance,	 at	 the	 waters	 of	 the	 shimmering
river.	A	crow	sat	cawing	outside.

“Dharma	will	be	restored,”	Dhaumya	said	with	finality.
“Hmm...”
“Of	course,	you	will	lead	the	Pandava	army.	Arjuna	will	be	delighted	to	have
you	as	Commander-in-Chief,”	Dhaumya	gushed,	trying	to	keep	his	voice	calm.
Drona	finished	chewing	his	paan	and	then	brought	his	gaze	back	to	the	priest’s
face.	“What	makes	you	think	I	will?”
“But,	of	course!	You	are	the	greatest	of	all	Brahmin	warriors	and	will	naturally
stand	on	the	side	of	dharma.”	Utter	conviction	rang	in	Dhaumya’s	rather	highpitched	voice.
“You	are	right.	I	will	stand	on	the	side	of	dharma,”	Drona	nodded,	picking	up
another	betel	leaf	from	his	box.
Dhaumya	looked	at	the	Guru.	Something	in	his	words	made	him	pause.	He	ask
hesitantly,	 “But	 you	 will	 act	 as	 Commander-in-Chief	 of	 the	 Pandava	 armies,
won’t	you?”
“I	am	a	soldier	of	dharma.	I	will	fight	in	the	Kaurava	army.”	Drona	pushed	the
swing	gently.	Its	creaking	as	it	swayed	back	and	forth	accentuated	the	shocked
silence.	A	lizard	clicked	tchak	tchak	tchak	from	the	thatched	roof	above.	Drona
watched	Dhaumya’s	expression	turn	from	shock	to	disbelief	to	anger.	He	spat
vermilion	 juice	 into	 the	 spittoon.	 Kripi,	 who	 had	 come	 in	 with	 a	 few	 pots	 of
buttermilk,	stood	frozen	in	surprise.
“Guru,	you	are	joking	at	my	expense?”	Dhaumya	finally	asked.
“I	have	never	been	more	serious,	Guru	Dhaumya.”
“Are	you	mad?	You	are	a	Brahmin;	you	must	support	dharma.”
“I	 am	 indeed	 a	 Brahmin	 and	 I	 know	 my	dharma.	 I	 will	 do	 everything	 in	 my
power	to	see	the	Pandavas	defeated,”	Drona	stated.
“You	 will	 be	 alone	 on	 the	 Kaurava	 side.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 fight	 Bhishma,”
Dhaumya	said	desperately,	trying	to	suppress	the	rising	panic	and	anger	in	his

voice.
“So	you	think,”	Drona	answered	calmly.	“Bhishma	will	lead	the	Kaurava	army.
Another	paan,	Guru	Dhaumya?”
“You	 are	 making	 a	 grave	 mistake,	 Drona.	 Your	 love	 for	 your	 son	 has	 made
you	blind.	You	will	regret	this	all	your	life.”
“Perhaps...”
“You	will	fight	against	Arjuna?”
Drona	 hesitated	 an	 instant.	 Something	 caught	 in	 his	 throat.	 He	 said	 in	 a	 gruff
voice,	“If	that	is	what	the	Lord	ordains.”
“You	are	a	fallen	Brahmin.”	Dhaumya’s	lips	trembled	with	anger.	“You	choose
to	fight	against	Krishna,	Lord	Vishnu	himself?”
“It	is	my	destiny.”
“You	will	rot	in	hell	if	you	defy	Krishna.”
“So	be	it.”
“You	are	worse	than	Kripa!	You	evil	Brahmin...you	Rakshasa!	With	the	powers
vested	in	me	I	hereby	excommunicate	you	and	your	family	from	the	Brahmin
community,”	Dhaumya	proclaimed,	his	voice	shaking	with	rage.
“Dhaumya,	Brahminism	is	not	a	caste	but	a	way	of	thinking.	I	had	become	one
of	the	living	dead,	caught	in	meaningless	rituals	and	superstitious	beliefs.	But	I
now	know	the	Parabrahmam;	 I	 am	 twice	 born	 –	 a	 real	 dwija.”	 Drona	 closed
his	eyes.	In	his	mind,	Shiva	danced	in	his	divine	glory.
“May	you	die	an	inglorious	death,”	Dhaumya	cursed.
Kripi	dropped	the	pots	of	buttermilk	in	shock.	She	rushed	to	her	husband	and
hugged	his	feet.	Drona	sat	in	meditative	silence,	the	swing	creaking	ominously
as	 it	 moved	 back	 and	 forth.	 Dhaumya	 stood	 up	 and	 rushed	 away	 without
another	word.

“Do	not	cry,”	Drona	said	to	his	sobbing	wife.	He	knew	she	would	be	thinking
of	her	son,	imagining	his	gouged	body	and	lifeless	eyes.	He	knew	he	had	never
treated	Kripi	as	his	equal,	nor	had	he	ever	expressed	his	love	to	Aswathama.	He
had	 always	 been	 the	 dutiful	 husband	 and	 stern	 father.	 Now	 he	 looked	 at	 his
life’s	 faithful	 companion	 and	 said,	 “I	 always	 considered	 you	 my	 Lakshmi,
massaging	 her	 Lord’s	 feet.	 But	 I	 should	 have	 seen	 you	 as	 my	 Shakti,	 my
Parvati,	my	equal	half,	just	as	Shakti	is	to	Lord	Ardhanareeswara.”
Kripi’s	 eyes	 swam	 with	 unshed	 tears.	 She	 could	 not	 believe	 the	 words	 her
husband	had	spoken,	words	she	had	never	hoped	to	hear.
Drona	shut	his	eyes.	“It	will	be	a	shame	if	I	survive	this	war.”
Kripi	 tried	 to	 protest	 but	 Drona	 placed	 a	 hand	 on	 her	 head.	 “This	 is	 my
promise	to	you,	wife,	your	son	will	not	die	in	this	war.	Not	before	me.”
Kripi	wept	for	the	man	she	had	more	feared	than	loved.	She	felt	guilty	that	she
had	worried	more	about	her	son’s	life	than	her	husband’s	death.
Drona’s	 feet	 were	 wet	 with	 Kripi’s	 tears	 as	 she	 bent	 her	 head	 in	 reverence.
Drona’s	face	remained	serene,	his	mind	still.	There	were	no	cries	of	love	or
war.
*****

46			THE	SONG	OF	GOD
	
“YOU	 MEAN	 THE	 PANDAVAS	 SHOULD	 FORGIVE	

the	 shaming	 of	 their	 wife	 and
thirteen	years	of	exile?”	Krishna	had	been	arguing	with	his	brother	for	some
time.
“The	 years	 of	 exile	 were	 the	 outcome	 of	 the	 Pandavas	 gambling	 away	 what
they	 had.	 Duryodhana	 cannot	 be	 blamed	 for	 that,”	 Balarama	 stated
unequivocally.
“Duryodhana?”	 Krishna	 chuckled.	 “So	 a	 strong	 man	 can	 do	 anything	 he
pleases?	 Only	 by	 winning	 the	 war	 against	 Duryodhana	 can	 the	 Pandavas
avenge	themselves.”
“What	makes	you	think	the	Pandavas	will	win?”
“Brother,	if	the	Pandavas	lose,	they	will	go	to	the	heaven	of	the	brave.	Future
generations	will	consider	them	heroes	who	died	in	the	cause	of	dharma.	If	they
refuse	 to	 fight,	 the	 world	 will	 see	 them	 as	 cowards.	 What	 could	 be	 more
shameful	than	that	for	Kshatriyas?”
“Krishna,	thousands	will	die.	The	war	will	make	so	many	women	widows,	so
many	children	orphans.	Can	you	even	imagine	the	horrors	of	the	famine	that	is
sure	to	follow?”	Tears	of	frustration	and	anger	welled	in	Balarama’s	eyes.
Exasperated,	Krishna	replied,	“Brother,	it	is	the	dharma	of	Kshatriyas	to	fight,
to	kill	evil	men	and	protect	the	weak...”
“Is	it	dharma	 to	 kill?	 Ahimsa	 is	 the	 greatest	dharma.	 All	 God’s	 creatures	 are
divine;	to	take	life	is	the	greatest	sin.”
“What	is	life	but	an	illusion?”

“Life	is	an	illusion	only	for	you,	Krishna.”
“The	entire	universe	is	an	illusion	–	maya.	Life	is	just	a	dream.”
“The	pain	of	life	is	real,	the	joy	of	living	is	real,	and	the	myriad	emotions	that
make	life	worth	living	are	all	real.”
Krishna	 smiled,	 “Brother,	 the	 wise	 do	 not	 grieve	 for	 the	 dead,	 nor	 love	 the
living.	 The	 soul	 is	 immortal	 and	 pervades	 the	 entire	 universe.	 He	 who	 thinks
that	his	soul	is	killed	when	his	body	is	slain,	is	ignorant.	The	soul	has	no	birth
or	death;	it	is	unborn,	unchangeable	and	eternal.	Only	the	body	perishes.	Just	as
we	throw	away	old	or	soiled	clothes,	the	soul	discards	the	body.”
“Say	 that	 to	 a	 mother	 who	 has	 lost	 her	 child.	 Try	 telling	 that	 to	 one	 who	 has
lost	 her	 beloved.	 What	 you	 say	 is	 merely	 an	 intellectual	 exercise,	 Krishna.	 It
does	not	 solve	 anything	but	acts	as	an	excuse	for	 violence.”	Balarama	turned
away	and	walked	to	the	window.	He	was	weary	of	the	world.
Krishna	looked	at	Balarama’s	bowed	shoulders	and	for	a	moment	pity	welled
in	his	heart.	He	loved	his	brother	but	he	could	not	stop	now.	Too	much	was	at
stake.	“What	is	born	will	die,	brother.	What	dies	will	be	reborn.	Day	gives	way
to	 night	 and	 night	 to	 day.	 It	 is	 the	 eternal	 cycle	 of	 life.	 Why	 mourn	 the
unavoidable?”
Balarama	 shook	 his	 head	 in	 dismay	 but	 let	 his	 brother	 continue.	 He	 told
himself	not	to	be	swayed	by	emotion.
“That	is	the	path	of	sankya,”	Krishna	stated.
“Call	it	by	any	name	you	wish,	but	violence	is	wrong,”	Balarama	responded	so
softly	that	Krishna	had	to	bend	forward	to	hear.
“Unfortunately,	 war	 has	 now	 become	 a	 necessity.	 If	 we	 allow	 Duryodhana	 to
rule,	there	will	be	an	intermingling	of	castes,”	said	Krishna.
“Is	that	such	a	bad	thing?”
“It	will	result	in	the	ruin	of	society	as	we	know	it.	Lawlessness	will	ensue.	No
one	will	know	what	his	dharma	is.”

Balarama	 smiled.	 “Ruin	 of	 society,	 Krishna?	 Because	 a	 few	 priests	 will	 not
have	their	way?”
“Brother,	I	have	created	four	caste	divisions	according	to	the	work	people	do.
That	is	their	dharma.	As	long	as	people	know	and	follow	their	dharma,	society
will	remain	strong	and	stable.	When	there	is	adharma	and	people	forget	their
caste	and	work,	chaos	ensues.”
“Those	who	benefit	accept	your	system	as	a	divine	message.	But	what	of	those
who	are	crushed	by	it?	Hunger	and	disease	know	no	caste	or	race.	Why	have
no	divine	beings	manifested	to	destroy	these	evils?”
“I	 have	 never	 sanctioned	 the	 crushing	 of	 one	 caste	 by	 another,	 brother.	 It
happens	 as	 an	 aberration	 and	 will	 be	 dealt	 with	 later.	 A	 free	 society	 without
rules	is	bound	to	self-destruct	eventually.	No	creature	is	superior	or	inferior	to
another,	but	each	has	its	own	function	in	the	natural	order.	So	has	caste.”
“It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 theory	 but	 impossible	 in	 practice.	 Prejudice	 is	 born	 when
divisions	exist.”
“Divisions	 are	 natural.	 The	 duties	 prescribed	 for	 Brahmins,	 Kshatriyas,
Vaishyas	 and	 Shudras	 are	 all	 different.	 Brahmins	 are	 those	 who	 seek
knowledge,	they	must	be	restrained	and	austere.	Kshatriyas	must	be	brave	and
firm	 and	 have	 the	 bearing	 of	 rulers.	 Agriculture,	 the	 tending	 of	 cattle,	 and
trade,	are	the	duties	of	the	Vaishyas.	For	the	Shudras,	duty	consists	in	servitude
to	the	other	three	classes.”
“Krishna,	there	lies	the	problem.”
“Brother,	every	man	who	engages	in	his	duty	as	ordained,	attains	moksha.	He
should	perform	his	duty	without	thinking	about	the	fruits	of	his	actions.	Doing
one’s	duty	as	prescribed	incurs	no	sin.”
“Who	decides	what	one’s	duty	is?”
“The	scriptures	are	the	authority	to	determine	what	one	should	do.”
“The	 scriptures	 are	 for	 man,	 not	 the	 other	 way	 round.	 Krishna,	 you	 speak	 of
arbitrary	divisions,	unnatural	ones.”

“Unnatural?	Nature	deludes	men	into	thinking	they	should	live	passionately.	If
everyone	follows	what	is	natural,	without	self-restraint,	ruin	will	result.”
The	 silence	 between	 the	 brothers	 was	 like	 an	 impenetrable	 fog.	 Finally,
Krishna	 moved	 closer	 to	 Balarama.	 “For	 a	 yogi,	 pain	 and	 pleasure	 are	 alike.
He	is	self-contained.”
“A	yogi?”
“When	a	man	gives	up	desire,	he	is	freed	from	craving	enjoyment.	He	has	no
affection	or	pride	and	thus	attains	peace	of	mind.	He	maintains	equanimity	in
both	pleasure	and	pain.	That	is	the	way	of	the	yogi.”
“Krishna,	you	are	giving	an	impossible	prescription	for	an	imaginary	illness.
It	 is	 natural	 for	 the	 mind	 to	 be	 restless,	 to	 seek,	 to	 strive,	 to	 achieve	 what	 it
can.”
“A	 yogi	 knows	 this	 and	 anchors	 his	 mind	 on	 me.	 He	 learns	 to	 look	 at	 a
Brahmin,	a	Chandala,	a	cow	or	a	dog	in	the	same	way.	A	yogi	is	indifferent	to
the	results	of	his	actions.	He	performs	nishkama	karma.”
“That	is	not	possible,	even	in	an	entire	lifetime	of	trying.”
“Brother,	who	said	it	happens	in	one	lifetime?	The	person	who	strives	thus	will
be	born	again,	and	will	strive	from	the	point	he	reached	in	his	previous	life.	It
takes	many	lives	to	meet	the	supreme	goal	of	being	one	with	me.”
Balarama	smiled,	remembering	the	naughty	younger	brother	who	had	insisted
on	following	him	around.	“And	if	he	fails?”
“Those	who	fail	are	born	again	and	again,	as	worms	or	beasts.	They	have	to
work	their	way	up	to	human	form	and	start	striving	again.”
“I	do	not	understand,	Krishna.	A	man	does	wrong	karma	and	is	then	born	as	a
beast,	say	a	buffalo,	but	can	we	find	anything	more	serene	and	detached	than	a
water	buffalo?	It	is	indifferent	to	rain,	sunshine,	dirty	water	or	dry	grass.	It	is
the	 picture	 of	 total	 contentment.	 Except	 for	 physical	 pain	 or	 pleasure,	 it	 does
not	 worry	 about	 the	 results	 of	 its	 actions.	 Does	 that	 make	 the	 buffalo	 the
supreme	 yogi?	 If	 it	 does,	 it	 should	 achieve	 moksha	 and	 not	 be	 reborn.”

Balarama	waited	to	see	what	his	divine	brother	would	say.
“You	are	arguing	for	the	sake	of	argument,”	Krishna	said,	a	trace	of	irritation
in	 his	 voice.	 “Brother,	 a	 man’s	 concern	 should	 be	 about	 his	 karma,	 not	 the
fruits	of	his	action.	He	should	be	devoted	to	his	work	without	getting	attached
to	it,	and	be	equally	impervious	to	success	and	failure.”
“Where	can	you	find	such	a	person,	Krishna?	How	will	I	recognize	someone
with	 such	 a	 steady	 mind?	 How	 does	 such	 an	 unusual	 person	 sit,	 speak	 and
move?”	Balarama	asked.
The	 sarcasm	 in	 Balarama’s	 words	 left	 Krishna	 unmoved.	 “He	 is	 called	 a
stithapranjna,	 one	 whose	 mind	 has	 equanimity.	 He	 is	 not	 agitated	 amid
calamities,	does	not	crave	pleasure,	and	is	free	of	attachments,	fear	and	wrath.”
“How	is	that	possible,	Krishna?	We	are	but	human	and	creatures	of	frailty.”
“Just	 as	 a	 tortoise	 withdraws	 its	 limbs	 into	 his	 shell,	 the	 yogi	 withdraws	 his
senses	 from	 the	 objects	 of	 desire.	 Just	 as	 the	 tortoise	 thus	 becomes	 strong,	 a
man	also	gains	strength	when	he	withdraws	from	desire	and	steadies	his	mind
in	contemplation.”
“Krishna,	 if	 you	 have	 reached	 that	 much-desired	 state,	 why	 does	 it	 matter	 to
you	whether	Yudhishtra	wins	the	war	or	Duryodhana?	Why	not	keep	your	mind
steady	in	contemplation	instead?”
“Brother,	 I	 do	 my	 karma	 without	 attachment,	 free	 from	 its	 results.	 The
destruction	 of	 evil	 is	 my	 duty.	 I	 do	 not	 relish	 violence,	 but	 I	 do	 what	 is
necessary.”
“A	 convenient	 argument,	 Krishna,	 and	 a	 recipe	 for	 a	 heartless	 world.	 It	 is	 a
mantra	for	a	conscienceless	society.”
“Why	do	you	say	that?”
“Krishna,	 a	 tyrant	 can	 unleash	 a	 pogrom	 and	 say	 it	 is	 his	 duty	 as	 a	 ruler	 to
cleanse	 his	 kingdom.	 We	 can	 justify	 any	 violence	 in	 the	 name	 of	 duty	 and
dharma.	 Any	 war	 can	 be	 justified	 as	 both	 sides	 consider	 they	 are	 following
their	dharma	in	butchering	each	other.	Even	a	bandit	can	claim	that	robbing	is

his	dharma.”
“Brother,	he	who	performs	action	without	worrying	about	the	results	is	sinless.
Those	 who	 perform	 actions	 with	 passion	 should	 be	 ready	 for	 the	 bitter	 or
sweet	fruits	of	those	actions.”
“That	is	an	even	more	dangerous	argument.	Is	misery	the	result	of	the	karma
of	the	miserable?	Then	compassion	would	have	no	meaning.”
“You	 do	 not	 understand,	 my	 brother,	 because	 your	 eyes	 have	 yet	 to	 see	 the
vision	of	divinity.”
“Krishna,	 such	 ideas	 can	 only	 create	 a	 callous	 and	 indifferent	 society.	 If
someone	 is	 wretched,	 it	 can	 be	 explained	 away	 as	 the	 result	 of	 some	 past
action,	if	not	in	this	life	then	in	some	other	birth.	Why	help	the	miserable	and
get	entangled	in	their	karma?”
“Brother,	you	have	taken	my	words	too	literally	–	it	was	just	an	allegory.”
“Krishna,	allegory	is	an	old	trick	of	philosophers	and	prophets.	Their	words
are	like	scattered	clouds	in	the	sky,	according	to	one’s	power	of	imagination,
one	 can	 see	 any	 shape	 in	 the	 clouds.	 Allegory	 is	 a	 safe	 bet	 for	 prophets	 and
Gurus.	When	caught,	they	can	claim	that	was	not	the	right	meaning.	If	you	want
to	say	something,	why	not	say	it	in	plain	language,	without	ambiguity?”
“Hear	 it	 then,	 brother.	 I	 allude	 to	 men	 like	 Duryodhana,	 who	 are	 deluded	 by
their	evil	desires.	Their	passionate	actions	cause	misery.”
“So	desire	and	passion	are	the	greatest	evils	of	man?”
“Brother,	by	desiring	an	object,	attachment	is	born.	From	attachment,	wrath	is
born.	From	wrath	comes	want	of	discrimination.	From	want	of	discrimination
arises	 ruination	 of	 intelligence.	 From	 loss	 of	 intelligence	 springs	 loss	 of
understanding,	and	then	man	is	ruined.”
“Krishna,	 from	 desire,	 life	 is	 born.	 From	 attachment,	 love.	 From	 passion,
beauty.	From	compassion,	humanity.	Desire	is	the	very	foundation	of	nature.”
“Desire	is	the	offspring	of	a	base	nature.	Duryodhana	is	the	epitome	of	tamo

guna.	Such	men	claim	life	is	created	from	lust.	They	are	deluded	by	ignorance
and	tossed	about	by	a	million	thoughts.”
“Thoughts	are	what	make	a	man,	Krishna.”
“The	 right	 thoughts,	 brother.	 Men	 like	 Duryodhana	 can	 only	 sink	 into	 a	 foul
hell.	They	are	wedded	to	vanity,	power,	pride,	lust	and	wrath.	In	every	life,	they
repeat	 the	 same	 mistakes	 and	 their	 path	 spirals	 down	 and	 down	 instead	 of	 up
and	up.”
“Krishna,	 if	 you	 are	 the	 Supreme	 Soul	 hurling	 these	 unfortunate	 men	 and
women	into	demonic	wombs,	how	are	they	to	blame?	By	your	own	admission,
you	have	made	them	that	way.”
“There	are	three	qualities	in	nature,	brother	–	satva,	rajo	 and	tamo.	All	three
are	 present	 in	 all	 of	 us.	 But	 it	 depends	 which	 one	 we	 nourish.	 Satva	 is	 the
quality	 of	 light,	 knowledge	 and	 equanimity;	 rajo	 is	 the	 quality	 of	 bravery,
chivalry	and	power;	and	tamo	is	passion	and	desire.”
“Show	me	one	person	who	is	not	passionate	about	something.”
“Yudhishtra.”
“Ah,	 the	 man	 who	 gambled	 away	 his	 wife.	 Was	 it	 because	 he	 was	 detached
about	her	or	the	kingdom	he	wanted	to	win	by	dicing?”
“Yudhishtra	 is	 a	 true	 yogi,	 a	 man	 of	 knowledge.	 I	 have	 to	 protect	 such	 men,
who	follow	the	right	path.”
“But	you	have	not	answered	my	question,	Krishna.	I	fail	to	see	the	Pandavas	as
detached	yogis	or	seekers	of	knowledge.	They	appear	to	be	nothing	more	than
seekers	of	power.”
“Brother,	you	have	chosen	to	close	your	eyes	to	the	truth.	The	Pandavas	are	my
devotees.	They	have	chosen	the	path	of	bhakti.	They	regard	me	as	the	highest
object	of	attainment	and	worship	me	with	devotion.	I	am	their	deliverer	from
the	 ocean	 of	 this	 sad	 world.	 I	 give	 you	 this	 great	mantra	 as	 well,	 the	 path	 of
yoga	and	the	imperishable	 system	of	devotion.	I	 declared	it	to	Vivaswat	eons
ago	and	he	declared	it	to	Manu,	who	passed	it	to	Ishvaku,	and	so	it	has	reached

this	age.”
“You	 are	 talking	 about	 Kings	 of	 the	 distant	 past,	 but	 you	 live	 today,	 Krishna.
You	are	even	younger	than	me.”
“Many	births	of	mine	have	passed.	Many	lifetimes	of	yours	have	passed	too.	I
know	it,	you	do	not.”
“I	do	not	understand	your	words,	Krishna,	how	will	others	do	so?”
“Then	 know	 that	 I	 am	 the	 Unborn.	 I	 am	 the	 Lord	 of	 all	 creatures.	 Whenever
there	is	loss	of	piety	and	evil	men	like	Duryodhana	rise	to	power,	I	am	born,
again	 and	 again,	 age	 after	 age,	 for	 the	 protection	 of	 the	 righteous	 and	 the
destruction	of	evil;	to	establish	piety	and	devotion	to	God.”
“Krishna,	you	are	merely	deluding	yourself.	I	have	known	you	since	the	day	of
your	birth,”	Balarama	said,	shaking	his	head	in	amusement	at	the	thought	of	his
naughty	little	brother	being	the	saviour	of	the	world.
Krishna	 smiled.	 “Brother,	 I	 am	 offering	 the	 human	 race	 the	 chance	 of
redemption	from	misery.	He	who	knows	this	truth	will	achieve	moksha.	He	will
not	 be	 born	 again	 but	 become	 one	 with	 me.	 Forsaking	 everything,	 let	 my
devotees	come	to	me	as	their	sole	refuge	and	I	will	deliver	them	from	all	sin.
Surrender	to	me	with	complete	devotion.”
“Krishna,”	 Balarama	 said,	 a	 rare	 smile	 tugging	 at	 the	 corners	 of	 his	 mouth,
“the	 world	 is	 indifferent	 to	 the	 petty	 travails	 of	 men.	 The	 search	 of	 an
individual	for	self	or	God,	within	or	without,	is	an	insignificant	event	for	the
universe.”
“Brother,	 many	 who	 have	 believed	 in	 me	 have	 been	 freed	 of	 attachment	 and
passion.	In	whatever	manner	people	come	to	me,	I	accept	them.	All	paths	lead
to	me.	Your	path	too.”
“Why	should	one	seek	God	and	try	to	escape	from	this	beautiful	world?	Why
exchange	 a	 hypothetical	 moksha	 for	 the	 real	 world?	 Jagat	 satyam,	 Brahma
mithya.”
Balarama	had	many	questions	for	his	brother	but	before	he	could	voice	any	of

them,	 Krishna	 said,	 “To	 those	 who	 worship	 me	 in	 any	 form,	 I	 give	 gifts	 and
preserve	 what	 they	 deserve	 to	 have.	 Even	 if	 they	 revere	 other	 Gods	 and
worship	 me	 irregularly,	 I	 bless	 them.	 But	 since	 their	 devotion	 is	 incomplete,
they	take	birth	again	and	again,	after	enjoying	a	place	in	heaven.	Do	everything
as	 an	 offering	 to	 me.	 That	 way,	 you	 will	 be	 detached	 from	 your	 actions	 and
come	to	me.	Brother,	know	that	even	if	a	wicked	person	worships	me	alone,	he
is	regarded	as	good.”
“If	you	are	the	Supreme	Being,	indifferent	to	the	results	of	your	actions,	why
are	you	so	obsessed	with	whether	someone	worships	you	or	not?	And	you	say
worshipping	you	will	redeem	any	sin?”
Krishna	ignored	the	incredulity	in	his	brother ’s	voice.	“None	devoted	to	me	is
lost,	 even	 if	 they	 are	 sinful.	 Even	 women,	 Vaishyas	 and	 Shudras	 can	 attain
moksha	if	they	worship	me.	In	this	transient	and	miserable	world,	be	engaged
in	my	worship.	Fix	your	mind	on	me,	be	my	devotee,	bow	to	me,	take	refuge	in
me	and	you	shall	come	to	me.”
“Who	are	you,	Krishna?”
“Brother	 Balarama,	 you	 do	 not	 know	 who	 you	 are	 or	 who	 I	 am.	 You	 are
infinity,	ananta.	But	I	am	beyond	infinity.	We	are	one,	yet	we	are	different.	The
difference	lies	in	realization.”
“Whoever	 you	 are,	 Krishna,	 you	 are	 bringing	 war	 and	 death	 to	 thousands,”
Balarama	said,	his	shoulders	drooping	in	defeat.
Krishna’s	eyes	looked	at	Balarama	but	gazed	beyond	him.	“Know	that	I	created
the	universe	at	the	beginning	of	kalpa.	As	all	creatures	who	take	birth,	live	and
die,	 the	 universe,	 too,	 has	 a	 lifespan.	 This	 is	 not	 the	 first	 universe	 you	 are
living	in,	nor	will	it	be	the	last.	I	will	destroy	it	when	the	time	comes	and	create
a	new	one.	That,	too,	will	be	destroyed	in	due	course.	This	cycle	will	continue
eternally.	I	only	perform	my	karma	here,	detached.	It	does	not	affect	me.”
“Everyone	has	to	eat	the	fruits	of	karma,	 Krishna.	 It	 does	 not	 matter	 whether
the	actions	were	performed	passionately	or	in	a	detached	fashion.	We	still	have
to	eat	the	bitter	fruit.	Now,	brother	will	fight	brother.	You	have	encouraged	it.
War	 will	 come,	 Krishna,	 and	 then	 none	 of	 these	 fancy	 words	 will	 help.	 I	 am

afraid	of	what	will	come...”
“Brother,	you	do	not	know	me	and	my	Supreme	nature	as	Lord	of	all	entities.
Ignorant	people	disregard	me.	I	am	the	Supreme	Soul	and	I	have	assumed	this
human	body.	Only	noble	souls	know	me,	they	glorify	and	bow	to	my	divinity.”
“Is	that	Duryodhana’s	sin	–	that	he	does	not	bow	to	you?	If	you	are	indeed	the
Supreme	Soul,	why	not	gift	him	understanding	and	devotion?	Why	bring	death
and	misery	to	innocents	who	have	nothing	to	do	with	either	of	you?	Why	not
destroy	 the	 evil	 man	 alone,	 instead	 of	 dragging	 all	 of	 Bharatavarsha	 into	 a
war?”	Balarama	asked	his	brother.
“I	 am	 the	 Father	 and	 Mother	 of	 the	 universe,	 and	 I	 am	 the	 Creator.	 I	 am
Immortality.	I	am	Death.	I	am	that	by	which	this	universe	is	held.	I	am	the	life
force,	 the	 source	 of	 evolution	 and	 dissolution.	 There	 is	 nothing	 greater	 than
me.	I	am	Om.”
“Krishna,	what	has	happened	to	you,	my	brother?”	Balarama	cried.
“He	 who	 knows	 me	 as	 the	 Supreme	 Lord	 of	 the	 worlds,	 without	 birth	 and
beginning,	 is	 free	 of	 all	 sin.	 Behold	 my	 glory	 of	 a	 thousand	 splendid	 suns.
Behold	 my	 infinite	 energy.	 I	 have	 no	 beginning,	 middle	 or	 end.	 Behold	 my
blazing	radiance	and	many-hued	eyes.”
Balarama	watched	in	horrified	silence.
“I	 am	 Death,	 the	 destroyer	 of	 worlds.	 Behold	 the	 sight	 of	 the	 sons	 of
Dhritarashtra,	Bhishma,	Drona	and	the	great	warriors	from	both	sides	entering
the	 mouth	 of	 Time.	 See	 how	 their	 heads	 are	 crushed,	 their	 limbs	 torn	 apart.
Behold	the	future	and	the	spectre	of	the	past.	Behold	me	for	I	am	TIME.”
“Krishna...”	 Balarama’s	 voice	 shook.	 “Because	 of	 your	 actions	 I	 fear
something	terrible	will	befall	Dwaraka.	That	is	the	law	of	karma,	the	law	of	the
universe.	It	does	not	spare	any	man,	even	an	avatar.”	Balarama	turned	away.	He
had	lost	the	argument.	There	was	nothing	left	for	an	ignorant	and	deluded	man
like	him	to	argue	about.	He	did	not	have	the	intellect	to	understand	the	divine
song	of	God.	Outside,	the	ocean	had	turned	blue-black,	like	the	colour	of	his
brother ’s	skin.	The	waters	beat	restlessly	against	the	rocks.

“I	 am	 TIME...”	 Krishna’s	 voice	 echoed	 in	 Balarama’s	 ears	 and	 fear	 of	 the
future	chilled	his	heart.
*****

47			THE	SONG	OF	MAN
	
BALARAMA’S	 GAZE	 ALIGHTED	 ON	 THE	 YOKE	 in	 one	 corner	 of	 the	 small	 room.

There	 was	 a	 time	 when,	 as	 a	 young	 man,	 he	 had	 carried	 it	 over	 his	 shoulder
every	day,	to	teach	his	people	about	agriculture	and	irrigation.	He	caressed	its
woody	contours	and	then	placed	it	on	his	shoulder,	feeling	its	familiar	weight.
He	would	walk	through	the	dusty	streets	of	Bharata,	from	the	Himalayas	in	the
north	to	the	city	of	Devi,	where	the	three	seas	met	in	the	south.	He	yearned	to
lose	himself	in	the	vastness	of	the	land,	far	from	the	madness	of	men	and	their
calls	for	dharmayudha.
Balarama	heard	someone	behind	him	and	turned.	Duryodhana’s	daughter	stood
in	 the	 doorway,	 tall	 and	 graceful.	 Ever	 since	 she	 had	 arrived	 in	 Dwaraka,
following	 her	 marriage	 to	 Krishna’s	 renegade	 son,	 she	 had	 been	 a	 silent
presence	in	the	palace,	much	like	the	shadows	that	graced	its	walls	at	night.
Lakshmana	spoke	softly.	“Uncle,	why	are	you	leaving	us?”
Balarama	looked	at	her	sorrowfully.	“I	do	not	know,	daughter.”
“May	I	accompany	you?”
Balarama	 was	 tempted	 to	 ask	 what	 her	 husband	 would	 say.	 Samba	 was
unpredictable	and	dangerous.
“My	husband	will	not	even	notice,”	Lakshmana	said,	as	if	reading	his	mind.
“Daughter,	the	path	will	be	too	rough	for	a	Princess’s	soft	feet.”
“It	would	be	an	honour	to	walk	barefoot	with	you.”
“It	will	be	a	very	long	walk,	daughter.	People	may	jeer	or	throw	stones	at	us.”

“I	am	not	afraid.”
Balarama	smiled	as	he	ran	his	fingers	over	his	now	bald	head.
“Someone	else	wants	to	come	with	us,	too,”	Lakshmana	said.
Valsala,	 his	 beautiful	 daughter,	 stepped	 out	 of	 the	 shadows	 and	 touched	 her
father ’s	feet.	“Take	me	too,	Father.”
“But	Abhimanyu?”	Balarama	asked.
“His	new	bride,	Uttara,	is	beautiful.	He	has	no	time	for	me	now.”
Balarama’s	heart	ached	for	his	child	as	she	rested	her	head	on	his	chest.	He	put
his	arms	around	her	gently,	wishing	he	could	protect	her	forever.
“I	wronged	Lakshmana	Kumara,	Father.	Now,	I	am	tasting	the	fruits	of	my	own
karma.	 Uncle	 Krishna	 was	 not	 to	 blame.	 I	 was	 blinded	 by	 my	 love	 for
Abhimanyu	and	we	compelled	him	to	help	us.	That	is	why	it	happened.	Look	at
us	now.	Abhimanyu	and	I	rarely	see	each	other	and	when	we	do,	silence	is	the
only	language	we	speak.”
Lakshmana	 Kumara’s	 perplexed	 face	 rose	 before	 Balarama’s	 eyes.	 Would	 he
ever	 be	 able	 to	 forgive	 himself	 and	 find	 peace?	 He	 began	 walking,	 ignoring
the	 bowing	 guards	 and	 looking	 straight	 ahead.	 He	 was	 no	 longer	 their	 King.
The	two	women	hurried	to	keep	up.
People	on	the	street	paused	to	watch	the	curious	sight.	Then	a	man	joined	them,
and	then	a	woman.	One	became	two,	two	became	ten	and	ten	became	a	hundred.
Soon,	thousands	were	following	the	old	man	and	the	two	young	girls,	without
asking	any	questions.
A	 few	 days	 later,	 an	 untouchable	 and	 his	 blind	 dog	 joined	 the	 strange
procession.	 Ironically,	 the	 songs	 he	 sang	 were	 about	 Krishna’s	 love.	 The
crowd	sang	with	him	as	Balarama	walked	through	the	miserable	villages	of	his
country,	 carrying	 his	 yoke	 on	 his	 shoulder.	 The	 motley	 crowd	 stopped	 at
hamlets	 to	 serve	 those	 forgotten	 by	 their	 rulers	 and	 forsaken	 by	 God.	 The
Song	of	Man	was	composed	without	words.

Near	the	banks	of	the	Yamuna,	they	encountered	a	group	led	by	Carvaka.	The
atheist	Guru	laughed	when	he	saw	Balarama.	“Where	are	you	going	to,	Sir?”
he	asked,	gazing	at	Balarama’s	entourage.
“In	search	of	God,	Carvaka.	Perhaps	I	have	found	him	in	you?	And	where	may
you	be	going?”	the	saint	asked	the	atheist.
“I	am	searching	for	Man,	Balarama.	I	think	I	have	found	him	in	you.”
The	atheist	and	the	saint	laughed	aloud.	The	crowd	around	them	joined	in	the
laughter	without	comprehending	a	word	either	had	spoken.
“That	is	a	dangerous	thing	to	do,	Carvaka,	searching	for	Man	in	a	holy	crowd
could	get	you	killed,”	Balarama	said,	chuckling.
“But	 you	 are	 walking	 an	 even	 more	 dangerous	 path,	 Balarama,	 if	 you	 have
begun	to	see	God	in	an	atheist.”
Balarama	 put	 his	 arms	 round	 the	 shoulders	 of	 his	 daughter	 and	 niece.
“Carvaka,	 I	 have	 no	 great	 philosophy	 to	 offer	 except	 that	 of	 love.	 I	 know	 no
mantras	except	that	of	peace.	I	am	not	an	avatar,	but	an	old	man	in	a	dhoti;	an
insignificant	 man	 in	 a	 land	 of	 dazzling	 Gods.	 But	 I	 will	 not	 give	 up.	 I	 will
return	in	every	age	to	walk	with	my	children.	I	do	not	seek	moksha	from	that.	I
have	only	one	simple	wish	–	to	return	to	my	country	whenever	she	needs	me.”
“Balarama,	 they	 will	 come	 after	 you.	 Their	 intellects	 may	 be	 blunt	 but	 their
arrows	are	sharp.”
“I	will	suffer	happily	for	my	children,	but	I	will	not	give	up	till	I	teach	them	the
dharma	of	ahimsa	and	love.”
The	 saint	 and	 the	 atheist,	 seekers	 both,	 bowed	 to	 each	 other	 and	 went	 their
separate	ways.
*****

48			THE	GREAT	SECRET
	
“SOME	OTHER	DAY,	JARA,”	Vidhura	said,	trying	to	walk	away.

But	 the	 beggar	 blocked	 his	 path	 and	 pleaded	 with	 folded	 hands,	 “Please,
Swami.	Devi	Kunti	is	sick	with	worry.”
Vidhura	 had	 been	 quietly	 ignoring	 Kunti’s	 requests	 to	 visit	 her.	 He	 could	 not
think	 of	 a	 way	 to	 avoid	 the	 visit	 now.	 Swallowing	 hard,	 he	 turned	 back	 and
started	walking	towards	the	street	where	he	had	once	lived.	Everything	looked
familiar,	yet	strange.	There	were	a	few	new	houses	and	the	tree	at	the	corner
had	grown	corpulent	with	age.	Some	of	the	houses	needed	a	new	coat	of	lime
and	 a	 few	 street	 lamps	 leaned	 at	 precarious	 angles.	 The	 smell	 of	 garbage
permeated	 the	 air	 and	 a	 cat	 peered	 out	 of	 an	 overflowing	 dustbin.	 Nothing
much	had	changed,	yet	everything	had.
“Ma,”	Jara	called.
The	 door	 creaked	 open	 and	 Vidhura	 gasped	 as	 he	 looked	 at	 Kunti.	 She	 had
aged	beyond	his	wildest	imagination.	The	once	beautiful	face	was	now	a	web
of	wrinkles,	the	long	and	glossy	black	hair,	silver.	He	hoped	the	meeting	would
soon	be	over	and	he	could	leave.
“Vidhura,	how	old	you	have	grown!”	Kunti	exclaimed,	drawing	an	answering
smile	from	Vidhura.
Vidhura	touched	his	balding	pate	and	said	with	a	courtier ’s	grace,	“Time	 has
not	been	kind,	Devi,	yet	you	look	untouched	by	its	hands.”
“Still	the	same	sweet	talker,	Vidhura.	Come	in.	I	have	been	desperately	trying	to
reach	you	for	quite	some	time.”
Jara	 walked	 away.	 The	 dog	 sniffed	 at	 Vidhura’s	 hands	 and	 then	 trotted	 off

behind	its	master.	Vidhura	stepped	out	to	the	veranda	and	sat	down.	His	son	had
once	 fallen	 here	 and	 they	 had	 rushed	 him	 to	 the	 palace	 Vaidya	 late	 in	 the
evening.	For	two	days	the	boy	had	cried	in	pain...
“There	is	going	to	be	a	war.”
Kunti’s	words	brought	Vidhura	back	to	the	present.	“Not	if	I	can	do	something
about	it,”	he	replied.
“You	 should	 visit	 me	 sometimes.	 No	 one	 comes	 here	 except	 Krishna.”	 Kunti
dabbed	her	eyes	with	the	end	of	her	sari.
Vidhura	 looked	 at	 the	 floor,	 not	 wanting	 to	 face	 her.	 “Devi,	 things	 have	 not
been	good	for	me,	either,”	he	finally	said.
“I	called	you	here	for	a	particular	reason.	There	was	a	time	when	I	wanted	my
children	 to	 outdo	 Gandhari’s	 sons	 in	 everything.	 I	 was	 afraid	 to	 become	 the
poor	relation	living	on	their	charity.	But	when	I	look	back	now,	it	all	seems	so
meaningless.”
“Devi,	the	rivalry	between	the	cousins	is	deep,	yet,	if	you	wish,	the	war	can	still
be	avoided.”
“I	want	my	son	to	be	King	after	Dhritarashtra,”	Kunti	said,	looking	towards	the
hills	in	the	distance.
“Gandhari	 wants	 Suyodhana	 to	 be	 King	 and	 you	 want	 Yudhishtra.”	 Vidhura
sighed.	He	was	wasting	his	time	here.
“I	do	not	speak	of	Yudhishtra.”	Kunti	turned	away	from	Vidhura	and	pulled	her
pallu	over	her	head.	Her	face	was	in	shadow	but	Vidhura	saw	the	glimmer	of
tears	in	her	eyes.
“I	don’t	understand.”	For	some	reason,	his	heart	began	pounding	in	his	chest.
Perhaps	it	was	the	way	she	had	spoken.
“I	speak	of	Karna.”
Had	 he	 heard	 correctly?	 Vidhura’s	 heart	 began	 beating	 like	 a	 frenzied	 drum.

“What	has	that	Sutaputra	to	do	with	it?”	Vidhura	asked,	looking	at	his	sister-inlaw	in	astonishment.
“He	is	not	a	Sutaputra.”
Vidhura	remained	silent,	waiting	for	Kunti	to	say	something	more.
“Karna	is	my	son,”	Kunti	said	on	a	sob.	Her	unshed	tears	threatened	to	choke
her.
Vidhura	 stood	 up,	 holding	 on	 to	 the	 bamboo	 pole	 near	 him.	 The	 world	 had
turned	upside	down.	The	man	who	had	been	ridiculed	for	his	caste	by	everyone
was	Kunti’s	firstborn	son?
“But	how?”	The	news	was	as	incredible	as	it	was	shocking.
“I	had	him	before	my	marriage	to	Pandu.	He	is	my	illegitimate	son.	It	would
have	created	a	huge	scandal	for	the	Princess	to	have	a	son	before	marriage.	I
was	just	sixteen.	So	I	gave	him	to	Mother	Ganga,	in	a	reed	basket,	leaving	him
to	live	or	die.	Every	day	I	have	prayed	for	him,	his	health	and	happiness.”
“Devi,	how	could	you	have	been	so	cruel,	to	him	and	to	yourself?”
“Vidhura,	I	have	borne	the	pain	and	guilt	every	living	moment	since	that	day.	I
saw	 him	 when	 he	 came	 to	 challenge	 Arjuna	 on	 the	 day	 of	 the	 Princes’
graduation.	I	watched	him	being	humiliated	by	one	and	all.	Only	Duryodhana
stood	by	my	son.	Now	my	sons	will	fight	each	other	and	I	am	afraid.”
Vidhura	knew	not	how	to	respond.	He	felt	both	revulsion	and	pity	for	the	old
woman	 before	 him.	 The	 reasons	 and	 justifications	 could	 be	 many	 but	 Karna
was	the	real	victim	in	this	drama.	“Why	did	you	choose	to	tell	me	this	now?”
he	finally	asked	in	a	low	voice.
“I	know	what	you	must	think	of	me,	yet	even	now	I	do	not	have	the	courage	to
tell	the	world	that	Karna	is	my	son.”
Vidhura	 waited	 but	 Kunti	 turned	 away.	 He	 wondered	 if	 she	 realized	 that	 her
secret	would	drag	the	whole	country	into	a	bloody	war.	Thousands	would	die
and	be	left	destitute.	He	wanted	to	shout	at	her	but	when	he	looked	into	Kunti’s

face,	he	could	not	bring	himself	to	do	it.	He	would	have	to	find	another	way.
“Devi,	 I	 will	 tell	 Lord	 Bhishma.	 He	 will	 find	 a	 way.	 Perhaps	 this	 is	 our	 last
chance	to	prevent	the	war.”
Kunti	sat	with	a	faraway	look	in	her	eyes.	Vidhura	bowed	and	took	his	leave.
The	future	looked	frightening.	It	was	going	to	be	a	major	war	and	both	sides
would	do	anything	to	win.	Vidhura	walked	the	familiar	road	to	the	palace.	He
had	 to	 meet	 the	 forgotten	 old	 man	 and	 tell	 him	 about	 Karna.	 It	 was	 his
country’s	last	hope.
***
The	 wheel	 of	 karma	 was	 turning.	 Suyodhana	 had	 been	 struck	 with	 many
tragedies	 but	 the	 best	 time	 to	 strike	 was	 when	 the	 enemy	 was	 down.	 The
Southern	 Confederate	 had	 declared	 its	 independence	 from	 Hastinapura.
Parashurama	 braced	 for	 Karna’s	 army	 to	 descend	 upon	 them.	 When	 nothing
happened,	 he	 grew	 bolder.	 The	 Guru	 restored	 dharma	 by	 reversing
Suyodhana’s	 reforms.	 Though	 Parashurama	 longed	 to	 be	 at	 Kurukshetra,	 he
knew	his	fighting	days	were	over.	He	would	control	his	puppets	from	behind
the	scenes.
“What	is	Takshaka’s	new	city	called?”	Parashurama	asked	Uthayan.
“Nagapura,	 the	 City	 of	 Nagas.	 Takshaka	 has	 reversed	 the	 caste	 rules	 and
everyone	except	Nagas	are	considered	untouchables.”
“The	 rise	 of	 Kali	 is	 imminent.”	 Parashurama	 spat	 out	 red	 paan	 juice.
“Nagapura	sits	at	the	centre	of	Bharatavarsha	–	an	ideal	place	to	instil	the	laws
of	dharma.”
“Guru,	the	Nagas	have	forgotten	the	lessons	of	Indraprastha	but	we	will	remind
them.	Do	we	move	to	Kurukshetra	after	that?”
“Kurukshetra!	 It	 will	 be	 the	 mother	 of	 all	 wars.	 Are	 the	 Kings	 of	 the
Confederate	ready	to	fight	evil?”
“Not	Kalinga,	Guru.	The	traitor	supports	the	Suta,	saying	he	has	been	chosen
by	the	Sun	God.”

“But	Krishna	is	siding	with	the	Pandavas.	Evil	will	be	vanquished.”
***
The	Confederate	army	marched	towards	Kurukshetra,	ravaging	everything	in
its	path.	They	captured	Nagapura	and	butchered	thousands	of	Nagas.	Takshaka
was	on	the	run	again.	Parashurama	felt	smug.	From	the	city	of	the	Nagas,	he
would	decide	the	present	and	future	of	Bharatavarsha.
Uthayan	travelled	further	north	and	led	the	Kings	of	the	Southern	Confederate
to	 the	 Pandava	 camp.	 He	 bent	 to	 touch	 Krishna	 and	 Dhaumya’s	 feet	 and	 then
bowed	to	Yudhishtra.	“We	have	come	from	the	distant	South	to	help	the	cause
of	dharma.”
“Ah,	 we	 were	 expecting	 you,”	 Dhaumya	 said	 smoothly.	 “We	 would	 like	 the
Confederate	 army	 to	 arrange	 for	 all	 the	 food	 and	 weapons	 for	 the	 Pandava
side.”
“But	we	came	to	fight	Duryodhana,”	Uthayan	protested.	He	was	confused,	this
was	not	the	treatment	he	had	expected.	It	was	almost	insulting.	Battles	had	been
fought	in	the	South	for	far	more	trivial	reasons.
“It	is	a	critical	job,	King	Uthayan.	Only	you	can	do	it.	The	country	is	reeling
from	 drought	 and	 there	 is	 barely	 anything	 for	 the	 people	 to	 eat,	 let	 alone
horses	 and	 elephants.	 It	 needs	 great	 administrative	 talent	 and	 your	 people	 are
famous	for	that.”	Dhaumya	smiled.
Perhaps	 what	 the	 good	 priest	 said	 was	 important.	 Uthayan	 turned	 to	 his
soldiers.	“Scrounge	in	every	home	and	force	open	every	granary.	There	is	no
time	 to	 waste.	 We	 must	 consolidate	 our	 supplies	 before	 the	 enemy	 grabs	 it.”
Uthayan	began	barking	orders	to	his	men.	In	an	exemplary	display	of	Southern
discipline,	the	Confederate	army	spread	into	the	countryside	to	forage,	pilfer
and	loot.
“Why	 did	 you	 do	 that,	 Guru?”	 Arjuna	 asked.	 He	 felt	 offended	 by	 the	 lack	 of
respect	shown	to	another	warrior.
But	Dhaumya	merely	smiled.	“They	are	not	pure	Kshatriyas.	They	have	Asura
blood.	This	is	not	only	about	winning	the	war	but	also	who	wins	it.”	He	let	his

words	 sink	 into	 the	 minds	 of	 the	 Pandavas.	 The	 last	 thing	 he	 wanted	 was
Uthayan	or	any	Asura	King	winning	the	war	for	them.	It	would	be	best	to	keep
such	glory	and	achievements	to	the	fringes.	The	carefully	built	theory	of	caste
purity	 would	 collapse	 if	 Uthayan	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 as	 skilled	 as	 Arjuna.	 That
would	make	the	war	meaningless.	In	matters	of	dharma,	it	was	not	worth	taking
such	risks.
Dhaumya	noticed	a	dark-skinned	young	man	standing	alone	at	the	edges	of	the
forest.	He	looked	like	a	Naga.	But	what	was	a	Naga	doing	at	the	Pandava	camp?
As	the	Guru	watched	with	growing	anger,	the	young	man	bowed	low.	He	had	to
find	 out	 who	 the	 youngster	 was.	 The	 face	 looked	 oddly	 familiar.	 Suddenly,
Dhaumya	stopped.	The	Naga	resembled	Arjuna!	If	he	was	right,	then	he	would
have	even	more	work	to	do	to	save	dharma,	the	Guru	thought.
*****

49			WAR	GAMES
	
BHISHMA	STARED	AT	THE	EMACIATED	figure	standing	before	him.	He	had	expected

Vidhura	 to	 age	 but	 nothing	 had	 prepared	 him	 for	 the	 frail	 and	 hunched	 man
standing	before	him	with	bowed	head.
“To	what	do	I	owe	the	honour	of	this	visit,	Vidhura?”	he	asked	gruffly,	trying
to	hide	the	distress	he	felt.	His	words	sounded	harsh	even	to	his	own	ears.
“Sir,	forgive	me,	but	I	did	not	have	the	strength	to	see	you	like	this,”	Vidhura
answered,	looking	at	the	floor.
“I	 am	 just	 a	 forgotten	 old	 man,	 caged	 in	 my	 room,	 unwanted	 by	 my	 grandnephews	 and	 my	 country.”	 Bhishma	 wished	 Vidhura,	 that	 man	 of	 unfaltering
reason	 and	 intellect,	 would	 protest,	 but	 his	 former	 Prime	 Minister	 stood	 in
stricken	silence.	Bhishma	shifted	the	manuscripts	on	his	table	listlessly.	Only	a
few	palm	leaves	containing	verses	from	the	Upanishads	remained.	Once	there
had	seemed	too	few	hours	in	the	day	to	get	through	what	lay	on	his	work-laden
table.
Vidhura’s	 heart	 filled	 with	 sorrow.	 Could	 any	 country	 prosper	 when	 it
dishonoured	the	noble	and	the	brave?	“Our	country	is	crumbling,”	he	said	in	a
low	voice.
“We	 don’t	deserve	anything	better,”	Bhishma	said,	slamming	his	palm	on	the
table.
“Sir,	why	did	you	not	stop	Suyodhana	from	pawning	the	country	to	Yuyutsu?”
Vidhura	asked	the	question	that	had	troubled	him	for	a	long	time.
“One	Prince	pawns	his	wife,	another	pawns	his	country	to	a	merchant.	What	is
the	 difference	 between	 the	 fools?”	 Bhishma	 asked,	 standing	 up.	 Despite	 his
years,	he	still	had	the	powerful	frame	of	the	warrior.

“There	is	going	to	be	a	war,”	said	Vidhura	softly,	almost	to	himself.
“So	be	it.	At	its	end,	there	will	be	one	fool	left	instead	of	two.”
“Drought	and	famine	loom	large.	People	are	starving	to	death,”	Vidhura	said,
knowing	Bhishma	knew	it	better	than	anyone	else.
“What	am	I	supposed	to	do	about	that?	There	is	a	King	on	the	throne;	there	are
mahatmas,	sages	and	avatars	living	 and	preaching	throughout	this	 land.	 Ours
is	 a	 holy	 land,	 is	 it	 not?	 We	 fight	 bloody	 wars	 to	 uphold	 dharma.	 Let	 the
common	man	die.	We	can	offer	them	moksha	in	the	afterlife.”	Bhishma’s	lips
curved	into	a	bitter	smile.
“We	must	stop	the	war.”	Vidhura	finally	raised	his	head	and	looked	Bhishma	in
the	eye.
“Do	you	know	a	way	to	do	that?	For	I	do	not.	Both	sides	are	bent	on	destroying
each	other.	I	have	done	what	I	could	for	as	long	as	I	could.	Enough!	Let	there
be	war.	Let	no	fool,	including	old	ones	like	me,	be	spared.	Let	a	new	Bharata
rise	from	the	ashes	of	our	funeral	pyres.”
“I	 have	 met	 Kunti,”	 Vidhura	 said	 in	 a	 low	 voice	 that	 was	 almost	 lost	 in	 the
echoing	vastness	of	the	chamber.
“Then	you	had	better	hurry	to	meet	Gandhari	as	well,	or	else	it	could	become
another	cause	for	war,”	Bhishma	said	with	a	tired	smile.
“She	told	me	something	shocking.”
Bhishma	grunted.
“About	Karna.”
“I	do	not	wish	to	hear	anything	about	that	Suta.”
“Karna	is	not	a	Suta,	nor	the	son	of	a	charioteer.”
“I	always	knew	he	was	a	bastard.	It	shows	in	his	arrogance.”

“Sir,	he	is	the	bastard	son	of	Devi	Kunti.”
Bhishma	 became	 as	 still	 as	 stone.	 Only	 the	 pulse	 throbbing	 in	 his	 temple
suggested	he	was	aware	of	what	had	been	said.	Then	he	turned	away	saying,	“It
is	a	lie.	Kunti	is	up	to	something.”
“Karna	was	born	before	Kunti’s	marriage	to	Pandu.	His	father	belonged	to	the
Suryavamsha	 dynasty	 of	 Sri	 Ramachandra.”	 Vidhura	 explained	 the	 entire
sequence	of	events.
Reluctantly,	 after	 many	 interpolations	 and	 questions,	 Bhishma	 took	 a	 deep
breath	and	said,	“This	changes	everything,	Vidhura.	I	have	always	been	harsh
on	Karna.	Now	it	seems	he	is	the	eldest	of	my	grand-nephews,	but	that	does	not
make	 him	 a	 Pandava.	 He	 is	 the	 illegitimate	 son	 of	 a	 daughter-in-law	 of	 the
house.	 Of	 course,	 there	 are	 shastras	 which	 sanction	 that,	 but	 the	 husband	 is
required	 to	 acknowledge	 his	 wife’s	 children	 begotten	 before	 marriage.	 That
has	not	happened	here.”
“Sir,	 this	 is	 the	 only	 chance	 for	 peace.	 Make	 Karna	 the	 next	 heir	 and	 no	 one
will	be	able	to	question	it,”	Vidhura	begged	earnestly.
“My	son,	you	do	not	know	Suyodhana	or	Yudhishtra	as	I	do.	Nor	do	you	know
Karna.	And	you	have	not	considered	Yuyutsu.	He	too,	is	an	illegitimate	son	of
Dhritarashtra.	 His	 father	 has	 accepted	 him	 publicly	 as	 his	 son.	 He	 could	 well
stake	 a	 claim	 to	 the	 throne.	 But	 I	 doubt	 Karna	 will	 be	 prepared	 to	 betray
Suyodhana.”
“Who	will	say	no	to	the	throne	of	Hastinapura,	Sir?	Karna	will	agree.	You	only
need	to	suggest	it.”
“Vidhura,	 for	 a	 wise	 man,	 you	 are	 being	 short-sighted.	 The	 issue	 of	 the
inheritance	has	to	be	settled	once	and	for	all.	War	is	the	best	way	to	do	that.”
“Sir,	 a	 war	 at	 this	 time	 would	 be	 a	 terrible	 thing.	 And	 what	 of	 the	 thousands
who	will	die	for	no	fault	of	their	own?”
“It	is	the	dharma	of	Kshatriyas	to	fight.”
“The	rains	have	failed	for	the	third	year.”

Bhishma	went	to	stand	by	the	window.	“I	will	lead	Suyodhana’s	army	but	I	will
ensure	 that	 none	 of	 the	 Pandavas	 die.	 We	 can	 use	 the	 drought	 and	 famine
conditions	to	force	peace.	In	three	or	four	days,	supplies	will	start	running	out.
Then	we	can	work	out	a	truce.”
“In	three	or	four	days	thousands	will	have	died,	Sir.”
“War	 is	 not	 about	 individuals.	 People	 are	 bound	 to	 die,	 but	 I	 will	 ensure	 the
Kuru	dynasty	survives,”	Bhishma	insisted,	annoyed	that	Vidhura	had	failed	to
see	his	deeper	point.
“There	 are	 other	 enmities	 that	 also	 run	 deep,	 Sir.	 Dhristadyumna,	 Drupada’s
son,	has	vowed	to	kill	Drona.”
“Nobody	can	touch	Drona.”
“Karna	 and	 Arjuna	 are	 itching	 for	 a	 fight.	 Once	 the	 war	 starts,	 you	 will	 be
unable	to	control	it,”	Vidhura	said	with	utter	certainty.	He	could	feel	the	knot	of
fear	in	his	stomach.
“Hmm,	you	have	a	point.	Karna	has	an	impulsive	nature.	I	saw	it	at	Virata.	We
must	find	a	way	to	keep	him	off	the	battlefield.”
“Sir,	please	reconsider...	a	war	will	be	disastrous	for	all.”	Vidhura	looked	at	the
old	warrior	by	the	window	and	knew	he	had	lost.	As	long	as	Bhishma	breathed,
there	would	be	no	compromise.
“Getting	sentimental	in	your	old	age,	Vidhura?	It	will	be	a	skirmish,	a	display
of	arms	to	demonstrate	to	these	fools	the	foolishness	of	war.”	Bhishma	walked
up	to	Vidhura	and	placed	both	hands	on	his	frail	shoulders.
Vidhura	took	both	Bhishma’s	hands	in	his	own	and	pressed	them	together.	He
stood	still,	praying	silently.	Bhishma	felt	sorrow	fill	his	heart	as	he	looked	at
Vidhura’s	bent	head.	He	was	just	a	trembling	shadow	of	the	fine,	upright	man
he	had	once	been.	Bhishma	saw	his	own	reflection	in	Vidhura’s	eyes.	They	both
looked	so	insignificant	now.	Was	he	starting	something	they	could	not	control?
No...he	had	years	of	experience	in	leading	armies.	He	knew	how	to	pace	a	war.
Only	that	Suta…perhaps	not	a	Suta...had	to	be	kept	away	from	the	battlefield.

Vidhura	paused	at	the	door,	remembering	something	important.	“Sir,	be	wary
of	Shikandi.”
“Ha,	what	can	that	eunuch	do	to	me?”	Bhishma	asked	with	genuine	amusement
in	his	still	rich	voice.
Vidhura	hesitated	a	moment	and	then	walked	away	with	tired	steps.
‘Poor	man,	he	is	far	too	sincere	for	these	times,’	Bhishma	thought	as	he	took	a
sword	off	the	wall	and	swung	it	gracefully.	His	old	limbs	were	still	supple.	He
chuckled	to	himself.	It	would	be	good	to	be	back	in	action.	Bhishma	felt	alive
again.
***
When	 Suyodhana	 entered	 the	 Sabha,	 the	 air	 was	 thick	 with	 anticipation.
Bhishma	had	called	the	Sabha	to	make	an	important	announcement.	Suyodhana
sat	down	near	Karna.	Why	was	Bhishma	avoiding	his	gaze?	His	father	looked
worried.
The	murmuring	stopped	as	Bhishma	rose	to	speak.	His	voice	lacked	its	usual
power	 and	 he	 sounded	 weary.	 “I	 have	 nurtured	 this	 country	 with	 my	 blood.
Vidhura	 and	 I	 toiled	 day	 and	 night	 so	 that	 our	 people	 could	 sleep	 peacefully.
Alas,	 now	 my	 grand-nephews	 want	 to	 fight	 each	 other.	 Both	 sides	 have
committed	 unspeakable	 atrocities.	 I	 have	 failed	 as	 a	 teacher	 and	 grandsire	 to
them.”
Suyodhana	felt	overcome	by	shame.	He	should	never	have	behaved	as	he	had
with	 Draupadi,	 no	 matter	 what	 she	 deserved.	 What	 had	 revenge	 gained	 him?
Then	 sudden	 resentment	 swamped	 his	 mind.	 How	 could	 Bhishma	 equate	 the
atrocities	of	the	Pandavas	with	his	foolishness?	His	action	had	been	directed	at
one	 woman,	 who	 had	 shamed	 him;	 the	 Pandavas	 had	 killed	 thousands	 of
innocents.
“Since	war	has	become	inevitable,	I	am	forced	to	take	sides.	On	one	hand	there
is	Arjuna,	who	is	dear	to	me.	I	admire	his	humility	and	skill	with	arms.	There
is	Yudhishtra,	who	is	saintly	in	his	demeanour.	I	owe	much	to	Draupadi	for	not
speaking	out	when	Suyodhana	shamed	her	in	public.”

Suyodhana’s	 heart	 sank.	 Bhishma	 was	 going	 to	 side	 with	 the	 Pandavas.	 He
would	 have	 to	 fight	 his	 venerable	 grandsire.	 And	 if	 Bhishma	 himself	 was
partial	 to	 the	 Pandavas,	 there	 was	 little	 question	 that	 Drona	 would	 side	 with
them	also.	Aswathama	would	then	go	with	his	father.	He	had	only	Karna.
“I	have	to	consider	Suyodhana	too.	He	has	his	faults.	His	arrogance	and	temper
have	 earned	 him	 many	 enemies.	 What	 he	 did	 to	 Draupadi	 was	 unpardonable.
Yet	I	do	not	judge	people	on	one	incident.	How	is	Suyodhana	as	a	ruler?	The
treasury	is	almost	empty	and	we	are	staring	at	imminent	famine.	That	is	not	the
mark	of	a	great	administrator.	But	his	mistakes	are	those	of	inexperience.	One
can	 gain	 experience,	 acquire	 wisdom	 and	 correct	 mistakes.	 He	 has	 corrected
one	such	mistake	by	not	giving	in	to	Yuyutsu’s	demands.”
Suyodhana	watched	Bhishma	intently.	What	was	he	hinting	at?
“What	cannot	be	acquired	is	goodness	of	heart.	Suyodhana	has	proved	himself
the	 better	 human	 being	 through	 numerous	 acts,	 some	 of	 which	 you	 may
perhaps	not	be	aware	of.	The	elevation	of	the	son	of	a	Suta	as	King	of	Anga;
treating	Ekalavya	as	an	equal;	his	misguided	but	well-intentioned	acts	to	bring
equality	to	all	men	and	women	across	the	country;	his	open	stand	against	what
he	considers	unfair,	all	prove	his	goodness	of	heart.	If	he	allows	me	to	do	so,	I
can	teach	him	administration.	What	I	need	not	teach	him	is	compassion	towards
the	downtrodden	and	a	sense	of	fairness	and	justice.”
Suyodhana’s	 hands	 were	 wet	 with	 perspiration.	 Bhishma’s	 next	 words	 fell	 as
gently	as	winter	rain.	“Son,	will	you	not	compromise	with	your	cousins,	since	I
ask	it	of	you?	Will	you	not	share	a	small	part	of	this	kingdom	in	order	to	avoid
bloodshed?”
Suyodhana	 wavered.	 He	 was	 at	 a	 loss	 for	 an	 answer.	 Gaining	 victory	 in	 war
was	not	going	to	be	easy.	Neither	was	he	sure	who	would	decide	to	defect	to	the
other	 side.	 By	 compromising,	 he	 could	 keep	 Hastinapura	 and	 most	 of	 the
country.	Finally,	he	looked	at	the	patriarch	and	said,	“Pitamaha,	can	you	vouch
that	Dhaumya	will	not	impose	his	laws	in	the	Pandava	part	of	the	kingdom?”
“No	one	can	predict	the	future,	son.”
“In	that	case	I	would	be	forsaking	half	my	subjects.”

“If	you	lose	the	war,	you	will	be	forsaking	all	your	subjects.”
“I	will	not	lose.	Dharma	is	with	me.”
Bhishma	shook	his	head.	Why	did	people	always	need	to	take	the	hard	road	to
learn	life’s	lessons?	Sighing,	he	pronounced	his	decision:	“I	will	fight	against
the	Pandavas.”
Suyodhana	 was	 not	 sure	 he	 had	 heard	 correctly.	 He	 looked	 at	 Bhishma	 in
disbelief	 and	 then	 fell	 to	 his	 knees,	 touching	 his	 forehead	 to	 the	 floor	 in
reverence	 before	 the	 patriarch.	 He	 could	 hear	 Dhritarashtra’s	 jubilant	 voice
and	people	shouting	in	excitement.
Drona	stood	up.	“It	will	be	a	great	honour	if	Lord	Bhishma	would	permit	me	to
fight	by	his	side.”
It	took	a	few	minutes	for	the	Sabha	to	comprehend	the	implications	of	Drona’s
simple	 statement.	 They	 had	 expected	 a	 sizzling	 speech	 from	 the	 Guru
denouncing	Suyodhana.	Deafening	cheers	rose	from	all	sides,	drowning	a	few
murmurs	 of	 surprise.	 Aswathama	 stared	 at	 his	 father	 in	 amazement,	 his	 heart
thudding	with	happiness.
Before	Duryodhana	could	express	his	gratitude,	a	boisterous	laugh	resounded
through	the	Sabha.	Kripa	walked	in	and	went	straight	to	his	brother-in-law.	“A
sudden	change	of	heart,	Drona?”
The	 Guru	 stared	 at	 Kripa	 in	 distaste	 and	 said	 coldly,	 “I	 am	 merely	 doing	 my
duty.”
“Oh,	 I	 thought	 you	 were	 trying	 to	 repay	 an	 undeserved	 fee,”	 Kripa	 chuckled.
He	turned	to	Suyodhana.	“Will	you	recruit	an	old	street	dog	into	your	army?”
Suyodhana	grasped	the	old	master ’s	hands.	He	suddenly	remembered	the	early
days	when	Kripa	had	taught	the	young	Kuru	Princes,	before	Drona	had	come
to	replace	him...	How	unpredictable	the	winds	of	war	were!	He	had	come	to	the
Sabha	 with	 little	 hope	 after	 Yuyutsu’s	 defection,	 yet	 those	 he	 had	 always
considered	to	be	Pandava	supporters	were	now	flocking	to	his	banner.
“How	about	the	Yadavas?”	Kripa	asked.

“Yadavas?	Krishna	hates	me.	The	entire	Yadava	army	will	be	fighting	against
us.”
“Hmm,	you	think	so?”	Kripa	said,	and	then	called,	“Kritavarma!”
The	 tall	 Yadava	 General	 entered	 and	 bowed	 to	 the	 King	 and	 Bhishma.
Kritavarma	addressed	Bhishma	in	a	clear	voice.	“Sir,	the	entire	Narayana	Sena
has	come	to	fight	for	dharma.	Allow	us	to	serve	under	you	in	your	army.”
Such	 bizarre	 things	 were	 happening!	 Suyodhana	 was	 at	 a	 loss	 for	 words.
Krishna	had	lost	control	over	his	own	army	and	they	had	defected	to	his	side?
Was	there	a	trap	here?
“General	Kritavarma,	is	Krishna	aware	of	your	decision?”	Bhishma	asked.
“Sir,	 Lord	 Balarama	 himself	 asked	 me	 to	 follow	 my	 conscience	 and	 Krishna
gave	the	Narayana	Sena	the	option	to	choose.	The	majority	chose	to	come	with
me.”
“And	 Krishna	 did	 not	 object?”	 Suyodhana	 asked,	 still	 bemused	 at	 the	 turn	 of
events.
“When	I	informed	him	of	my	decision	to	side	with	you,	all	he	said	was,	‘Each
one	according	to	his	own	dharma’.”
Suyodhana	 stared	at	Kritavarma.	What	was	it	about	Krishna	that	he	could	 not
fathom?	Krishna	was	an	enigma.
“Where	is	Lord	Balarama?”	Bhishma	asked.
“Sir,	 he	 is	 walking	 as	 a	 mendicant	 through	 the	 little-known	 pathways	 of	 our
land,	heartbroken.	He	has	relinquished	the	throne.”
Why	 had	 his	 Guru	 not	 sided	 with	 him,	 wondered	 Suyodhana.	 When	 so	 many
great	men	had	decided	to	fight	on	his	side,	thinking	it	was	the	right	choice,	why
had	only	Balarama	remained	neutral?
Bhishma	 cleared	 his	 throat.	 “The	 kingdoms	 of	 Pragjyotisha,	 Mahishmati,
Avanti,	Madhaydesa,	Bahlikas,	Kamboja,	Sakas,	Trilingas,	Tusharas	and	many

others,	 have	 offered	 alliances.	 The	 friendship	 of	 Anga,	 Gandhara	 and
Sindhudesa,	etc.,	remain	firm;	they	will	always	stand	by	us.	The	kingdoms	of
the	Southern	Confederate,	like	Chera,	Chola	and	Pandya,	are	expected	to	ally
themselves	with	the	Pandavas.	Magadha	also.”
“Kalinga?”	Kripa	asked
Bhishma	looked	at	Karna.	“The	old	King	of	Kalinga	will	be	on	the	side	of	the
warrior	chosen	by	the	Sun	God.”
“Karna	is	the	chosen	one,”	Suyodhana	said,	smiling	at	his	friend.
“It	is	too	early	to	predict	which	side	Karna	will	fight	on,”	Bhishma	said.	There
was	 a	 murmur	 of	 surprise	 all	 around.	 Surely	 there	 could	 be	 no	 doubt	 about
that?	Karna	would	stand	Suyodhana’s	friend	unto	death.
“Sir,	you	insult	me	and	my	friendship	with	Prince	Suyodhana.”	Karna’s	bright
face	darkened	as	he	stood	to	his	imposing	height.
“When	 a	 Kshatriya	 speaks,	 a	 Sutaputra	 ought	 to	 remain	 silent,”	 Bhishma
replied	coldly.
“Pitamaha,”	 Suyodhana	 said,	 “why	 do	 you	 alone	 refuse	 to	 respect	 the	 great
warrior	that	Karna	is?	Even	the	Sun	God	chose	him	as	his	own.”
“Prince,	you	will	have	to	choose	between	him	and	me.	Wars	are	for	Kshatriyas.
This	Suta	is	both	immature	and	reckless.	We	saw	it	at	Virata.	Let	him	be	content
with	driving	a	chariot.”
Face	aflame	with	rage	and	humiliation,	Karna	turned	to	walk	out	of	the	Sabha
but	Suyodhana	grabbed	his	wrist.	“Karna,	do	not	go.”
Karna	looked	into	his	friend’s	eyes	and	asked,	“Do	you	trust	me	to	win	the	war
for	you?”
Suyodhana	faltered.	If	he	chose	Karna,	he	was	sure	to	lose	the	support	of	both
Bhishma	 and	 Drona.	 How	 many	 others	 would	 refuse	 to	 fight	 beside	 a	 Suta?
Karna	 saw	 the	 hesitation	 in	 his	 friend’s	 face	 and	 deliberately	 prised
Suyodhana’s	grip	from	his	wrist,	one	finger	at	a	time.	He	bowed	to	all	the	great

men	in	the	Sabha	and	walked	away.
Bhishma	sighed	softly	to	himself.	The	deed	was	done.
*****

50			RELUCTANT	WARRIORS
	
“ULUKA,	 SEEK	 YOUR	 COUSIN’S	 BLESSINGS.	

You	 too,	 Vrika.”	 Shakuni’s	 voice
startled	Suyodhana.	His	uncle	was	beaming	at	him.
“Why	 have	 you	 called	 your	 sons	 from	 Gandhara?”	 Suyodhana	 asked	 as	 he
placed	his	hands	on	the	bent	heads	of	the	young	men	at	his	feet.
“Do	you	think	Gandharan	Princes	hide	behind	their	mother ’s	pallu	when	a	war
is	 on?”	 Shakuni	 asked,	 and	 then	 added	 with	 a	 smile,	 “Of	 course,	 Lakshmana
Kumara	is	different.”
“What	do	you	mean,	Uncle?”
“Oh,	we	all	enjoy	his	poetry.	And	what	a	voice	he	has!”
Suyodhana’s	face	clouded	with	anger.	Shakuni	immediately	replaced	his	smile
with	a	look	of	specious	concern.	“Suyodhana,	do	not	force	the	boy	to	do	what
he	 does	 not	 wish	 to.	 We	 are	 all	 here	 to	 bring	 you	 victory.	 The	 boy	 is	 his
mother ’s	darling.	Allow	him	to	remain	here.	We	can	enjoy	his	verse	once	we
have	vanquished	the	Pandavas.”
Shakuni	 left	 with	 his	 sons.	 Suyodhana	 remained	 standing,	 his	 face	 furrowed
with	worry.
***
“He	 is	 the	 future	 ruler,	 Bhanumati.	 Why	 don’t	 you	 understand?”	 Suyodhana
tried	to	keep	calm.	He	did	not	want	a	discussion	with	his	wife	about	their	son.
“I	want	to	participate	in	the	war,	mother,”	Lakshmana	Kumara’s	voice	was	low,
fearing	his	father ’s	temper.

Suyodhana	sighed.	‘What	am	I	going	to	do	with	such	a	boy?’
“This	is	between	your	father	and	me,	son,”	said	Bhanumati.
“He	is	not	a	baby,	Bhanu.	He	cannot	hide	in	the	palace	and	write	poetry	when
the	entire	country	is	at	war.”
“My	son	is	not	going	to	fight	your	war	and	die.	Let	us	have	no	argument	about
this.”
“Do	you	not	understand	what	is	at	stake?”
“Mother,	I	wish	to	fight	beside	my	father.”	Kumara’s	voice	was	soft	but	sure.
“I	have	said	no.	Leave	us.	This	is	for	your	father	and	me	to	decide.”
“Stay	where	you	are,	Kumara.	Bhanu,	he	is	a	Kshatriya.	Why	do	you	insist	on
bringing	 shame	 upon	 him	 and	 me?	 Do	 you	 really	 wish	 to	 hear	 him	 being
called	a	coward?”
“It	is	better	than	calling	him	dead.”
“He	 is	 the	 same	 age	 as	 Abhimanyu.	 Have	 you	 not	 heard	 the	 paeans	 the	 bards
sing	about	Subhadra	and	Arjuna’s	son?”
“So	that	is	it…	my	son	is	not	as	good	as	hers?	I	am	not	as	good	as...”
“Enough!	He	is	coming	with	me	into	battle,	like	a	true	Kshatriya.”
“You	are	not	going	anywhere.”	Bhanumati	turned	back	to	her	son.
Kumara	shook	his	head	at	her	gently	and	then	moved	to	stand	beside	his	father.
“I	am	sorry,	mother,	but	I	must	go.	I	cannot	let	down	my	father,	the	family,	the
country...”
“What	do	you	know	about	fighting,	son?	How	will	you	face	great	warriors	like
Arjuna?”	Bhanumati	said,	her	voice	cracking.	She	went	over	to	her	son	and	put
a	hand	on	his	shoulder.
“I	will	do	my	utmost,	mother.”

“It	will	not	be	good	enough.	You	will	die.	Do	not	go!	You	are	the	only	one	left
to	me.”
“Bhanu,	 stop	 this!”	 Suyodhana	 went	 to	 stand	 in	 front	 of	 his	 son.	 But	 the
defiance	 had	 gone	 from	 Bhaumati’s	 face	 and	 she	 looked	 vulnerable,	 like	 an
injured	sparrow.	Suyodhana	lifted	her	chin	and	looked	into	her	wet	eyes.	How
beautiful	she	still	was!	“Bhanu,	don’t	you	trust	me?	Don’t	you	believe	me?	Do
you	think	I	would	allow	any	harm	to	befall	him?	He	is	my	son	too,	Bhanu.”
“I	am	afraid.”	Bhanumati	pressed	her	face	to	her	husband’s	chest.
Suyodhana	gently	ran	his	hand	over	her	hair.	“So	am	I,	Bhanu.	So	are	all	the
fathers	and	mothers	of	Bharatavarsha.	This	will	be	the	war	to	end	all	wars	in
our	lifetime.”
“He	is	all	that	we	have.	Why	not	give	up	your	claim	to	the	throne	and	avoid	the
war,	Suyodhana?”
“It	is	not	about	the	throne	or	power,	Bhanu.”
“You	 are	 lying	 to	 yourself.	 Power	 is	 all	 that	 matters	 to	 you.	 You	 do	 not	 care
what	happens	to	me	or	our	son.”
“What	do	you	want	from	me,	Bhanu?	That	I	allow	the	sons	of	my	Aunt	Kunti	to
ruin	 the	 country?	 I	 want	 people	 to	 remember	 me	 as	 the	 one	 who	 fought	 for
them.”
“Have	you	thought	about	what	will	happen	if	you	fail?”
“The	country	will	sink	into	the	quagmire	of	jati	and	varna.”
“But	have	you	thought	about	what	will	happen	to	you	if	you	fail?	You	will	be
painted	as	the	greatest	villain	who	ever	lived.	Do	you	want	that?”
“Bhanu,	 fear	 of	 posterity	 cannot	 prevent	 me	 from	 doing	 what	 I	 know	 to	 be
right.”
“You	talk	as	if	you	know	you	will	lose.”

“No,	 Bhanu,	 I	 will	 not	 lose.	 Dharma	 is	 on	 my	 side.	 Dharma	 never	 loses.
Besides,	 Lord	 Bhishma,	 Guru	 Drona,	 Karna,	 Aswathama,	 are	 all	 there.	 How
can	I	not	win?	Trust	me,	nothing	will	happen	to	our	son.	He	too,	must	do	this.”
“My	heart	is	breaking...”	Bhanumati	broke	away	from	her	husband	and	rushed
from	the	room,	weeping.
Suyodhana	sighed	and	turned	to	his	son.	He	could	not	remember	when	he	had
last	been	alone	with	his	son	since	the	marriage	fiasco.	It	was	difficult	to	say	it
but	he	plunged	on	with	what	was	on	his	mind.	“Son,	I	had	been	harsh	on	you.	I
only	learnt	later	that	you	were	trapped.	Valsala	and	Abhimanyu	played	a	cruel
joke	on	you	and	I	believed	them.”
“Father,	that	is	behind	us.	Let	it	remain	there.”
“Are	 you	 still	 in	 love	 with	 Valsala?”	 You	 need	 not	 try	 so	 hard	 to	 keep	 your
emotions	hidden	from	me,	son.	I	know	how	it	feels.	Suyodhana	wanted	to	put
his	hand	on	his	son’s	shoulder	but	it	felt	as	heavy	as	lead.	“When	the	woman
you	love	leaves	you,	it	hurts	like	the	fires	of	hell.	At	first	you	think	it	will	kill
you,	 then	 time	 heals	 the	 wound.	 The	 scar	 always	 remains	 but	 it	 is	 no	 longer
agony.”
“Do	you	still	remember	her,	father?”
“Who?”	Suyodhana	snapped.
“Abhimanyu’s	mother,	Aunt	Subhadra.”
“Who	told	you	about	that?”
“Has	your	wound	healed,	Father?”
“Who	has	been	feeding	you	with	such	nonsensical	tales?	I	have	been	married	to
your	 mother	 for	 more	 than	 two	 decades.	 Ask	 her	 whether	 I	 have	 ever	 been
unfaithful.	I	do	not	collect	women	like	Subhadra’s	husband.”
“It	was	not	my	mother	who	told	me	about	your	love	for	Aunt	Subhadra.”
“Then	who?”

“Aunt	Subhadra	herself.”
Suyodhana	was	dumbfounded.	She	had	no	right	to	do	that.	His	throat	became
parched	and	something	which	he	had	buried	deep	within,	began	to	hurt	again.
He	did	not	trust	his	face	to	hide	what	he	felt	so	he	turned	away	from	his	son.
“She	wants	to	meet	you,	Father.”
“Any	of	my	subjects	can	meet	me	at	an	appointed	time,”	Suyodhana	replied.	He
hoped	his	son	could	not	hear	the	palpitations	of	his	heart.
“She	wants	to	meet	you	alone.	She	has	something	to	say	that	is	very	important.”
“It	is	improper	to	meet	another	man’s	wife	in	secret.”
“She	will	be	waiting	for	you	by	the	temple	near	the	river,	tonight.”
How	 could	 a	 father	 discuss	 his	 first	 love	 with	 his	 son?	 ‘Subhadra,	 you	 never
left	my	heart.’	Instead,	he	smiled	and	asked,	“Are	you	afraid?”
Kumara	knew	his	father	had	deliberately	changed	the	subject.	“Yes,	I	am.	Only
fools	feel	no	fear.”
It	was	certainly	not	the	reply	Suyodhana	had	expected	from	his	son.	Perhaps	he
had	not	taken	the	time	to	know	him.	“Don’t	tell	me	you	are	doing	it	for	me,”	he
said.
“No.	I	am	a	Kuru	Prince	and	we	are	a	race	of	warriors.”	Kumara’s	eyes	belied
his	words.
‘I	 do	 not	 deserve	 such	 love,	 my	 son,’	 thought	 Suyodhana	 as	 he	 looked	 at	 his
son’s	 gentle	 eyes	 and	 calm	 demeanour.	 Kumara	 walked	 away,	 leaving
Suyodhana’s	heart	heavy	with	the	emotions	of	both	the	past	and	the	present.
Subhadra	 would	 be	 waiting	 for	 him	 tonight.	 Suyodhana	 wished	 night	 would
never	fall.
***

Iravan	was	nervous.	The	smoke	from	many	cooking	fires	snaked	towards	the
heavens.	The	idea	of	sneaking	into	the	Pandava	camp	seemed	more	and	more
crazy	 as	 he	 neared	 the	 encampment.	 His	 cousin	 Khatotkacha	 had	 proved	 his
worth	by	foiling	the	marriage	of	the	young	Kaurava	Prince.	He	might	even	be
invited	by	his	father,	Bhima,	to	fight.	But	did	his	own	father,	Arjuna,	even	know
of	his	son’s	existence,	he	wondered?
The	sun	was	a	ball	of	fire	above	Iravan’s	head	but	winter	was	sneaking	into	the
shade	of	the	trees.	There	had	been	no	rains	this	year	either	and	he	was	hungry
more	often	than	not.	War	would	be	a	quick	way	to	end	the	misery.
“Halt,	 Naga!	 How	 dare	 you	 pollute	 this	 holy	 place?”	 Dhaumya’s	 bark	 made
Iravan	jump.
“I...I	am	Iravan,	son	of	Arjuna,”	he	managed	to	say.
“What	do	you	want?”	Dhaumya	asked	tersely.
Words	deserted	Iravan.	Where	was	his	father?	His	palms	were	sweating	but	he
resisted	the	temptation	to	rub	them	together.	“I	have	come	to	join	my	father,”
he	gulped.
“This	is	not	a	hunting	ground	for	savages.	This	is	a	Kshatriya	war.”	Dhaumya
spat	on	the	ground	and	instinctively	Iravan	knew	he	had	walked	into	trouble.
*****

51			IRAVAN
	
IRAVAN	 LIFTED	 HIS	 BOW	 AND	 DREW	 AN	 ARROW	

from	 his	 quiver	 with	 shaking
fingers.	Warriors	turned	their	heads	to	see	what	the	fraças	was	about,	and	some
of	them	ambled	over	to	watch.	Iravan’s	arrow	soared	high	into	the	sky	like	an
eagle	 and	 perched	 an	 inch	 below	 the	 fluttering	 saffron	 Pandava	 flag.	 He	 shot
another	 arrow	 and	 then	 another,	 and	 another.	 Under	 the	 amazed	 gaze	 of	 the
priests	 and	 Kshatriyas	 alike,	 the	 Naga	 drew	 the	 figure	 of	 a	 serpent	 with	 his
arrows.	Finished,	he	bowed	to	Guru	Dhaumya.
“Who	taught	you	to	shoot	like	that?”	Dhaumya	asked.	The	crowd	of	onlookers
shoved	each	other	to	get	closer	to	hear	the	answer.
“My	Guru,	Ekalavya.”
As	whispers	ran	through	the	crowd	like	wind	through	grass,	Iravan	wondered
where	his	father	was.	Had	Arjuna	seen	him?
“Son	of	Arjuna,	do	you	wish	to	help	your	father	win	the	war?”
“I	do,	Swami,”	Iravan	said.	The	glimmer	of	hope	made	his	voice	tremble.	He
felt	lightheaded.
“Are	you	a	brahmachari?”	Dhaumya’s	voice	was	as	smooth	as	silk.
“Am	I...	a	what?”
“You	are	not	married?”	the	Guru	snapped,	losing	patience.
“No,	Swami.”	Iravan’s	breathing	quickened.
“Are	you	willing	to	lay	down	your	life	for	your	father,	Iravan?”

“I	am,	Swami.”	His	heart	thudded	against	his	ribs.
“Good.”	 Dhaumya	 turned	 to	 his	 disciples.	 “Make	 arrangements	 for	 the
sacrifice.	The	most	eligible	man	has	offered	himself.”
There	 were	 angry	 murmurs	 among	 the	 Kshatriya	 warriors	 but	 they	 became
silent	 when	 Dhaumya	 stood	 up.	 The	 priest	 walked	 away,	 keeping	 as	 much
distance	as	possible	between	himself	and	Iravan’s	polluting	body.
***
Someone	 poured	 water	 over	 Iravan’s	 head.	 It	 was	 freezing!	 Ganga	 water	 for
his	purification,	someone	said.	The	chanting	of	holy	mantras	rose	on	all	sides
and	a	priest	placed	a	tilak	on	his	forehead.	A	garland	of	red	flowers	was	thrust
over	his	head.
“What	 is	 happening?”Iravan	 asked,	 but	 the	 rising	 crescendo	 of	 holy	 chants
drowned	 out	 his	 voice.	 In	 some	 corner	 of	 his	 mind	 he	 felt	 a	 sense	 of	 pride;
everyone	was	bowing	to	him.	But	his	instincts	screamed	danger	as	he	struggled
to	understand	what	was	happening.	Why	were	they	dragging	him	like	a	goat?
Oh	no!	He	was	to	be	sacrificed	like	a	goat!	Iravan	tried	wriggling	away	but	too
many	people	pushed	him	towards	the	fierce	idol	of	Kali	and	strong	hands	held
him	 down	 at	 the	 sacrificial	 altar.	 The	 stone	 was	 slippery	 with	 blood.	 The
severed	heads	of	goats	mocked	him.	The	smell	of	blood	and	goat	urine	almost
made	 him	 gag.	 Iravan	 felt	 dizzy	 and	 his	 limbs	 grew	 weak.	 ‘Ma	 Kali,	 what
wrong	 have	 I	 done	 to	 these	 people?’	 he	 asked	 from	 the	 depths	 of	 his
desperation.
“What	 is	 happening	 here?”	 Iravan’s	 heart	 missed	 a	 beat.	 He	 had	 heard	 that
voice	in	his	dreams.	His	father	had	come	at	last.	Iravan	struggled	to	get	up	and
look	at	Arjuna,	but	he	was	shoved	down.
“To	ensure	our	victory,	this	brave	man	has	volunteered	to	sacrifice	himself.”
Dhaumya’s	voice	seemed	to	come	from	a	distance,	slurred	and	strained.	They
were	going	to	sacrifice	him!	Iravan	struggled	to	free	himself.	He	did	not	want
to	die.	He	was	too	young	to	die.
“A	human	sacrifice?	He	is	just	a	boy,”	Arjuna	said	to	Guru	Dhaumya.

“He	volunteered.	Our	tradition	respects	all	customs.	We	are	a	tolerant	people,”
Dhaumya	intoned	unctuously	and	threw	saffron	powder	on	Iravan’s	face.	The
boy	coughed.	His	tears	mixed	with	the	powder,	looking	like	blood.
“Only	barbarians	such	as	the	Nagas	follow	such	customs.”
His	father ’s	words	hurt	Iravan	more	than	the	vice-like	grip	of	his	captor.	His
ceased	to	struggle	and	went	limp.	‘He	trapped	me,’	Iravan	wanted	to	scream	but
the	words	died	in	his	throat	as	flowers	and	rice	were	pushed	into	his	mouth.
“He	is	trying	to	say	something,”	Arjuna	said.
Dhaumya	placed	his	ear	to	Iravan’s	mouth.	“Oh,	he	is	saying	his	last	wish	is	for
us	 to	 raise	 his	 severed	 head	 on	 a	 stake.	 Rather	 a	 strange	 request.	 The	 poor
fellow	believes	his	head	will	then	witness	the	great	war	of	dharma.”
‘No!	I	do	not	want	to	die.	I	came	to	help	my	father.’	Iravan	spat	out	the	rice	and
flowers.	 “Father,	 help	 me!”	 The	 mantras	 were	 deafening.	 The	 coldness	 of	 a
sword	 touched	 the	 back	 of	 his	 neck,	 marking	 its	 striking	 spot.	 ‘My	 Guru
Ekalavya	 only	 sacrificed	 a	 thumb.	 I	 should	 be	 proud	 to	 sacrifice	 myself,’
thought	Iravan	as	he	shut	his	eyes	tight.
“Wait!	I	know	this	boy,	I	know	his	face,”	Arjuna	said,	but	the	sword	had	already
fallen.	The	decapitated	head	of	his	son	rolled	towards	his	feet,	its	eyes	staring
at	him	in	innocent	surprise.
“Guru...	it	is	my	son,	my	son...”	Arjuna	jumped	away	from	Iravan’s	head	as	if	it
was	a	viper	ready	to	strike.
“A	great	sacrifice	in	the	name	of	dharma!”	declared	the	priest.
“Krishna!	They	have	killed	my	son!	Is	this	dharma?”	shouted	Arjuna,	his	voice
and	body	trembling.
Krishna	 ran	 to	 where	 Arjuna	 stood	 gazing	 in	 shocked	 horror	 at	 his	 son’s
decapitated	 body.	 He	 looked	 at	 Dhaumya,	 his	 eyes	 glowing	 like	 coals	 in	 his
dark	and	handsome	face.
“It	was	the	Supreme	Sacrifice,	Lord.”	Dhaumya	bowed.

Krishna	 did	 not	 miss	 the	 implication.	 The	 wily	 Guru	 was	 alluding	 to
Ekalavya’s	death.	Things	were	getting	out	of	hand.	Dhaumya’s	fanaticism	was
frightening.	 Krishna	 yearned	 for	 a	 stable	 society,	 but	 looking	 at	 the	 priest’s
glittering	eyes,	he	wondered	what	the	future	would	bring.
Arjuna	 freed	 himself	 from	 Krishna’s	 grip.	 “I	 am	 sick	 of	 this.	 I	 will	 not	 fight
anymore.”
“Arjuna,	listen	to	me,	I	will	explain.”	Krishna	hurried	after	his	friend,	trying	to
talk	Arjuna	out	of	his	depression.
Dhaumya	picked	up	the	lifeless	head	of	Iravan	by	its	hair.	“Raise	this	thing	on	a
pole	 and	 plant	 it	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 battlefield.	 May	 it	 strike	 terror	 in	 the
minds	of	all	low-castes	who	forget	their	dharma.”
Soon,	Kurukshetra	had	a	stake	pierced	into	its	heart.	The	lifeless	eyes	of	Iravan
bored	into	the	conscience	of	the	warriors	on	both	 sides	for	the	next	eighteen
days.	The	temple	of	dharma	had	sacrified	its	first	blood.
*****

52			KSHATRIYA
	
“CASTE!	 CASTE!	 CASTE!”	 Karna	 kicked	 a	 stone	 into	 the	 water.	 His	 toe	 hurt	 but	 it

was	nothing	compared	to	what	he	felt	inside.	He	had	never	expected	Bhishma
to	stoop	so	low.	Years	before,	Karna	had	tried	to	drown	himself	in	the	waters
of	this	holy	river.	It	would	have	been	far,	far	better	had	Kripa	left	him	to	die
that	day.	He	had	suffered	enough	for	many	lifetimes.	What	pained	him	the	most
was	 the	 hesitation	 he	 had	 seen	 in	 Suyodhana’s	 eyes.	 His	 defeat	 at	 Arjuna’s
hands	at	Virata	had	shaken	the	belief	of	even	his	closest	friend.	Arjuna	was	a
lucky	bastard.	He	had	everything	–	caste,	lineage,	fame;	he	even	had	the	woman
Karna	 had	 once	 loved	 deeply.	 ‘Draupadi,	 why	 do	 I	 still	 yearn	 for	 you?’	 he
thought	in	agony.	Could	a	Suta	even	lift	his	eyes	to	such	a	woman?
A	shadow	fell	on	the	water	and	Karna’s	warrior	instincts	became	taut	and	alert.
Someone	stood	behind	him.	In	one	fluid	movement	he	had	turned,	his	sword	in
his	hand.
“Krishna!”	 Karna	 could	 not	 hide	 his	 surprise.	 “Have	 you	 come	 to	 do	 to	 me
what	you	did	to	Ekalavya?”
Krishna	smiled	his	most	charming	smile.	“Karna,	my	friend,	you	are	like	my
brother.	Why	would	I	harm	you?”
“I	am	in	no	mood	for	small	talk,	Krishna,	leave	me	alone.”	Karna	sheathed	his
sword.	 Krishna	 was	 the	 last	 person	 he	 wanted	 to	 talk	 to.	 He	 stepped	 into	 the
water,	his	back	to	the	Yadava.	The	river	was	turning	saffron	in	the	west.
Krishna	scooped	up	some	water	and	washed	his	face.	“I	understand	your	pain,
Karna,	 but	 like	 the	 waters	 of	 the	 holy	 Ganga,	 what	 I	 say	 will	 cleanse	 your
soul.”
“Krishna,	leave	me	alone.”

“Do	you	know	who	you	are?”
“The	whole	world	knows	who	this	Suta	is.”
“What	is	it	that	you	have	always	wished	for,	Karna?”
When	Karna	remained	silent,	Krishna	said,	“To	be	a	Kshatriya.”
“I	know	I	am	only	a	lowly	Suta.	Now	go.”
“All	Bharatavarsha	could	be	yours	before	you	can	blink,	Karna.”
“Krishna,	the	peddler	of	impossible	dreams.	But	even	Sutas	run	out	of	patience
sometimes.”
“Karna,	I	met	your	mother	today.”
Karna’s	heart	skipped	a	beat.	When	 had	he	last	 been	 home	to	 see	 his	parents,
Athiratha	and	Radha?	Why	had	Krishna	cared	to	visit	a	stable-keeper ’s	hut?
“She	wants	you	to	be	King	of	Hastinapura.”
“All	mothers	want	their	sons	to	be	Kings.”
“Ah,	but	your	 mother	 can	 make	 you	 King	 of	 Bharatavarsha.	 If	 you	 agree,	 no
one	can	stop	you.	You	will	be	the	greatest	of	all	Kshatriyas,	the	King	of	Kings.”
“If	you	are	done	with	mocking	a	poor	Suta	woman,	please	go.”
“I	am	not	talking	about	your	Suta	mother,	Karna.”
“So	even	mothers	have	castes	now?”
“Karna,	you	are	not	a	Suta,	but	the	greatest	of	Kshatriyas.”
“Do	not	tell	me	that	caste	is	based	only	on	character	and	not	on	birth.	I	am	tired
of	 that	 excuse.	 All	 the	 high-castes	 parrot	 it	 but	 I	 can	 no	 longer	 accept	 their
smug	smiles	and	platitudes,	as	though	their	high	status	was	the	result	of	their
exalted	 character	 and	 not	 a	 mere	 accident	 of	 birth.	 To	 them	 it	 is	 just	 a
philosophy,	but	to	us	at	the	bottom,	it	is	life.”

“Karna,	listen	to	what	I	am	saying.	Radha	and	Athiratha	are	your	foster	parents.
You	are	a	Kshatriya	by	birth.”
Karna	stared	at	Krishna	in	complete	bewilderment.	What	was	the	Yadava	trying
to	 tell	 him?	 It	 did	 not	 make	 any	 sense.	 In	 the	 distance	 he	 could	 see	 Vidhura.
Beside	 him	 stood	 a	 veiled	 woman.	 She	 looked	 oddly	 familiar.	 His	 heart
skipped	a	beat.	Could	it	be...?
“Karna,	you	are	the	son	of	a	Suryavamsha,	a	Prince	of	the	exalted	Sun	dynasty,
the	same	as	Lord	Rama.	And	your	mother	is	Devi	Kunti.”
The	 world	 spun	 around	 Karna.	 He	 felt	 dizzy.	 He	 was	 the	 son	 of	 Kunti,	 the
mother	of	the	 Pandavas?	Arjuna,	 his	most	hated	enemy,	 was	his	brother?	His
heart	felt	like	it	would	burst	through	his	chest.
“Karna,	do	not	blame	your	mother.	She	was	unmarried	when	she	had	you.	You
know	how	it	is.	An	unmarried	woman	giving	birth	to...”
“So	she	decided	to	throw	me	away!	Mother…	is	she	not	ashamed	to	call	herself
that?”	 Anger	 was	 a	 strong	 shield	 to	 hide	 behind.	 His	 emotions	 threatened	 to
overwhelm	Karna.	Nothing	made	sense.	“Where	did	my	parents	find	me?	In	the
garbage?”
“They	found	you	in	the	lap	of	Mother	Ganga.”
Karna	quickly	pulled	his	legs	out	of	the	river	and	began	climbing	the	steps	of
the	ghat.
“Karna,	I	have	not	finished.”
Karna	halted.	“I	must	see	my	mother.”
“You	are	a	great	man.	Devi	Kunti	will	be	delighted.”
“I	meant	my	real	mother,	Krishna.	I	must	see	her.	“
“Patience,	 brother.	 It	 is	 admirable	 that	 you	 love	 your	 foster	 parents,	 but
remember,	you	are	going	to	be	Emperor	of	Bharatavarsha.”

Karna	 paused.	 The	 ache	 in	 his	 heart	 felt	 like	 a	 physical	 pain.	 His	 head	 was
aflame.	 He	 yearned	 to	 reach	 Radha’s	 safe	 embrace,	 away	 from	 a	 world	 gone
mad.
“Karna,	Yudhishtra	would	have	 no	objection	to	handing	 over	the	 kingdom	to
an	elder	brother.	Now	that	you	are	a	Kshatriya,	Dhaumya	and	the	other	priests
too,	will	have	no	objection.”
“Krishna,	there	is	already	an	heir	to	the	throne.”
“Karna,	you	are	the	eldest;	the	throne	is	rightfully	yours.”
“You	think	Suyodhana	would	agree	with	you?”
“If	he	does	not,	we	will	fight	him.	Dharma...”
“Is	 this	 the	 advice	 of	 a	 divine	 avatar?	 To	 betray	 the	 man	 who	 has	 made	 me
what	I	am?	Is	this	your	dharma?”
“The	Pandavas	are	your	own	blood.	Kunti	is	your	mother,	Karna.”
“I	 have	 only	 a	 few	 friends,	 those	 who	 stood	 by	 me	 when	 the	 whole	 world
jeered	at	my	caste.	No	Kshatriya	other	than	Suyodhana	came	to	my	rescue;	no
Brahmin	 other	 than	 Aswathama	 stepped	 forward	 to	 shield	 me.	 Even	 if	 you
offer	me	the	whole	world,	I	will	never	betray	them.”
“You	can	avoid	a	war	that	will	kill	thousands.”
“Accept	Suyodhana	as	King	and	there	will	be	no	war.”
“For	your	mother ’s	sake,	if	not	your	own,	accept	the	throne,	Karna.”
“Radha	is	my	mother,	Krishna.	I	am	a	Sutaputra.”
“Then	I	will	offer	you	something	you	will	not	be	able	to	refuse.”
“Do	not	say	another	word.	Leave	me	alone,	Krishna.”	Karna	guessed	what	was
coming	and	he	did	not	trust	himself.
“Kunti	will	persuade	Draupadi	to	be	your	wife,	too.	As	the	eldest,	you	will...”

“Enough!	 The	 Pandavas	 would	 do	 anything	 for	 power	 –	 gamble,	 cheat	 and
even	sell	their	wife	to	the	enemy.”
“Karna,	you	are	throwing	away	a	great	destiny.”
“Leave	this	Suta	alone!”
“Karna,	you	will	regret	it.”
“Let	dharma	win,	Krishna.”
Karna	 hurried	 away	 from	 the	 river,	 his	 mind	 in	 turmoil.	 Everything	 he	 had
always	 believed	 in	 had	 come	 tumbling	 down.	 He	 felt	 ashamed	 that	 he	 had
almost	 been	 tempted	 by	 Krishna’s	 offer,	 particularly	 the	 last	 one.	 ‘Draupadi,
you	almost	made	me	into	a	devil.’	He	hated	and	loved	her	with	equal	ferocity;
how	 was	 that	 even	 possible?	 But	 as	 Karna	 neared	 his	 childhood	 home,	 his
feelings	towards	Draupadi	turned	to	pity.	How	could	she	bear	to	live	with	such
husbands?
The	 hut	 looked	 the	 same.	 There	 was	 the	 toy	 bow	 he	 had	 played	 with,	 it	 still
hung	 on	 a	 nail	 on	 the	 mud	 wall	 of	 the	 veranda.	 The	 rangoli	 his	 mother	 had
painted	in	the	courtyard	brought	a	flood	of	memories	rushing	back.	It	was	here
that	 he	 had	 waited	 impatiently	 for	 his	 charioteer	 father	 to	 take	 him	 to	 Guru
Drona;	it	was	in	this	hut	that	Athiratha	had	comforted	him	when	the	Guru	had
rejected	him.	He	was	the	luckiest	son	alive	to	have	had	such	love.
“Ma!”	Karna	called.	His	heart	thumped	against	his	ribcage	when	he	heard	the
familiar	 rustle	 of	 her	 saree.	 The	 door	 creaked	 open	 and	 the	 aroma	 of	 his
mother ’s	cooking	wafted	out.	A	stooped	figure	with	greying	hair	stared	at	him,
her	 gaze	 lingering	 on	 his	 dazzling	 earrings.	 Radha	 burst	 into	 tears	 of
happiness.
“Who	is	that?”	Karna	heard	his	father	ask.
Before	 his	 mother	 could	 say	 anything,	 Karna	 embraced	 her	 and	 said,	 “I	 am
hungry.”
Radha	showered	him	with	kisses	and	Karna	melted	in	shame,	guilt	and	love.	He
had	returned	to	where	he	belonged.	Radha	hurried	off	to	prepare	his	favourite

dishes.	Adhiratha	looked	up	as	Karna’s	tall	frame	filled	the	doorway	but	he	did
not	say	a	word.	Karna	smelt	the	musty	sweetness	of	his	home.	He	would	stay
here	 until	 his	 friend	 needed	 him	 again.	 Karna	 knew	 in	 his	 heart	 that	 such
ruthless	enemies	would	not	fight	fairly.	His	friend	would	lose,	but	he,	Karna,
would	ensure	it	was	a	glorious	defeat	and	far	better	than	a	shame-filled	victory.
It	was	the	least	a	Suta	could	do	for	his	Kshatriya	friend.
*****

53			LOVE	RETURNS
	
WHEN	 HIS	 SON	 HAD	 TOLD	 HIM	 SUBHADRA	

would	 be	 waiting	 near	 the	 temple,
Suyodhana	had	convinced	himself	he	would	not	go.	Bhanu	had	cried	herself	to
sleep,	grieving	 for	her	 son.	He	 had	held	her	so	that	he	would	not	be	tempted
when	the	time	came.	He	could	not	remember	when	he	had	last	hugged	Bhanu
that	way.	His	wife	purred	in	her	sleep,	content	with	his	touch.	It	almost	broke
his	 heart.	 Yet,	 at	 the	 appointed	 time,	 he	 stood	 near	 the	 temple,	 the	 Ganga
flowing	like	dark	ink	in	the	background.
“I	did	not	think	you	would	come,”	she	said.
Her	 voice	 was	 just	 the	 same	 as	 all	 those	 years	 ago,	 when	 they	 had	 been
teenagers	lost	in	love.	The	breeze	ruffled	her	hair	and	he	wished	he	could	tuck
the	strands	back	behind	her	ears	as	he	used	to	do.	Instead,	he	folded	his	arms
across	his	chest.
“Thank	you	for	coming,	Suyo.	I	did	not	think	Lakshmana	Kumara	would	tell
you.	He	is	a	sweet	boy,”	Subhadra	said,	her	diamond	nose	stud	glittering	in	the
moonlight.	“Do	you	still	think	of	me?”
Thank	 God,	 she	 could	 not	 see	 his	 face.	 ‘What	 answer	 do	 you	 want	 from	 me,
Subhadra?	Would	it	make	you	happy	if	I	told	you	the	truth,	that	I	have	ached	for
you	 every	 moment?’	 Suyodhana	 turned	 away.	 “Why	 do	 you	 care?”	 That	 was
not	 what	 he	 had	 meant	 to	 say,	 a	 simple	 no	 or	 nothing	 at	 all	 would	 have	 been
better.
“How	is	Arjuna?”	Suyodhana	asked.	It	was	a	foolish	question	and	an	awkward
one.	She	did	not	answer	but	a	smile	played	on	her	lips.	Those	full	red	lips	were
just	the	same	too,	and	the	memory	of	their	taste	came	flooding	back	to	him.	He
wanted	nothing	more	in	that	moment	than	to	kiss	them	once	again.	Suyodhana
shook	his	head	and	looked	up	at	the	night	sky.

“It	is	about	Abhimanyu.”
“I	 hope	 he	 is	 looking	 after	 Valsala.	 Oh	 I	 forgot,	 he	 has	 married	 again	 hasn’t
he?	How	is	Uttara	doing?”
“Suyo,	you	are	still	angry	about	what	my	boy	did	to	your	son?”
‘No,	Subhadra,	I	am	still	mad	at	what	you	did	to	me	years	ago.’	It	was	almost
more	than	he	could	bear	to	be	alone	with	her,	so	near	that	he	could	smell	the
fragrance	of	her	hair.
“My	 son	 is	 so	 full	 of	 vigour	 that	 I	 sometimes	 fear	 for	 his	 life.	 He	 still	 loves
Valsala,	but	he	is	madly	in	love	with	Uttara	now.”
“No	doubt	he	will	marry	scores	of	women.	He	has	a	long	way	to	go.”
“He	is	such	a	handsome	boy,”	Subhadra	said	and	then	frowned.	“I	know	what
you	have	left	unsaid,	Suyo	–	like	father,	like	son.	If	you	think	I	am	unhappy	I
married	 Arjuna,	 you	 are	 mistaken.	 I	 do	 not	 care	 how	 many	 wives	 he	 has,	 he
still	loves	me	the	most.”
“Your	vehemence	convinces	me.	My	prayers	are	always	with	you.”
“Sarcasm	 does	 not	 suit	 you,	 Suyo.	 You	 are	 still	 in	 love	 with	 me.”	 Subhadra
laughed.
Her	still	girlish	laughter	made	him	feel	that	spring	had	come	early.
“Was	it	I	who	called	for	this	rendezvous	or	you?”
Subhadra	fell	silent.	Time	had	not	healed	the	wounds,	only	kept	them	hidden.	“I
have	come	as	a	friend,”	she	said,	averting	her	gaze.
Suyodhana	 walked	 towards	 the	 river.	 The	 silver	 moon	 lay	 shattered	 in	 the
Ganga.	He	hoped	Bhanu	had	not	woken	to	find	him	gone.
“Uttara	is	pregnant.”
“Convey	 my	 congratulations	 to	 Abhimanyu.	 But	 you	 do	 not	 look	 nearly	 old

enough	to	be	a	grandmother,	Subhadra.”
Subhadra’s	 dimples	leapt	 into	her	cheeks	for	 a	 brief	moment.	“Abhimanyu	is
impatient	for	war.”
“Should	I	be	happy	to	know	your	son	is	itching	to	kill	me?”
“Suyo,	he	just	wants	to	help	his	father.”
A	sharp	retort	rose	to	Suyodhana’s	lips.	To	his	surprise,	she	began	to	weep.	“I
am	afraid...	he	does	not	listen	to	me.	To	his	father	he	is	just	one	among	many
sons	 from	 many	 wives,	 but	 I	 have	 only	 him.	 He	 is	 too	 young	 to	 fight	 in	 this
war.”	She	moved	closer	and	gripped	Suyodhana’s	angavastra,	wetting	his	chest
with	her	tears.	Her	perfume	brought	back	ghosts	of	long	dead	moments	and	he
felt	 himself	 going	 weak	 at	 the	 knees.	 Even	 after	 all	 these	 years,	 he	 could	 not
bear	to	see	her	in	tears.
“Please,	 Suyo,	 spare	 my	 son.	 He	 is	 too	 young	 to	 fight	 you	 or	 Karna	 or	 the
other	great	warriors	on	your	side.”
Suyodhana’s	mind	felt	numb.	He	could	 almost	hear	Bhanu	pleading	 with	 him
about	Lakshmana	Kumara.	Bhanu!	What	was	he	doing	here	with	Arjuna’s	wife?
Suyodhana	 turned	 away	 from	 Subhadra,	 freeing	 himself	 from	 her	 grip.	 “It	 is
war,	not	child’s	play.	In	battle,	warriors	get	hurt	and	killed.”
“Is	Abhimanyu	just	a	warrior	to	you?	As	a	child,	he	adored	you.”
“The	women’s	wing	of	the	Dwaraka	palace	is	large.	If	he	is	afraid,	let	him	hide
there.”
“My	son	is	no	coward!	He	is	Arjuna’s	son!”
“Then	ask	Arjuna	to	protect	him,	if	he	can.”
Subhadra’s	 eyes	 flashed	 in	 anger.	 Suyodhana	 refused	 to	 meet	 her	 gaze	 and
stood	staring	at	the	river,	his	hands	crossed	over	his	chest.
“You	are	no	longer	the	Suyodhana	I	knew.”

“The	Suyodhana	you	knew	died	when	you	eloped	with	my	cousin.”
“I	thank	my	stars	and	my	brother	Krishna,	for	that.	You	are	the	most	evil	man	I
know.”
“Duryodhana	is	evil,	Subhadra;	the	whole	world	knows	it.”
“Your	arrogance	knows	no	limits.	You	have	insulted	my	son,	my	husband,	and
me.	You	will	pay	the	price,	Duryodhana.	I	will	tell	my	son	not	to	flinch	if	his
arrow	points	at	you.	I	will	advise	him	to	be	the	worthy	son	of	a	great	father.	He
will	be	the	storm	that	will	destroy	your	armies.”
“You	 came	 to	 beg	 me	 for	 your	 son’s	 life	 and	 now	 you	 are	 cursing	 me?	 You
have	not	changed	at	all.”
“Duryodhana,	keep	away	your	Lakshmana	Kumara	from	the	battlefield.	If	the
royal	 poet	 shows	 his	 face	 to	 Abhimanyu,	 you	 can	 start	 making	 the	 funeral
arrangements	for	your	son.”
Suyodhana	turned	and	walked	away.	He	could	feel	her	eyes	on	his	back.	He	was
furious	and	yet,	how	he	loved	her	still!	He	hurried	back	to	the	palace,	his	head
bent.	 When	 he	 passed	 his	 son’s	 chamber,	 he	 paused	 to	 listen	 to	 Kumara’s
breathing.	He	fiddled	with	the	pearl	necklace	he	wore,	trying	to	suppress	longforgotten	 memories.	 Then	 too,	 the	 air	 had	 smelt	 of	 burning	 incense	 and
smoking	 torches.	 Bhanu	 had	 been	 talking	 to	 Subhadra,	 and	 Abhimanyu	 had
been	 a	 soft	 little	 bundle	 in	 his	 arms,	 playing	 with	 his	 pearl	 necklace.	 He	 had
bestowed	the	necklace	on	Subhadra’s	son,	kissing	his	curls.
The	 smoke	 from	 the	 dying	 torches	 was	 making	 his	 eyes	 burn.	 Suyodhana
hoped	 Subhadra	 had	 returned	 safely.	 He	 should	 not	 have	 left	 her	 alone	 at	 the
deserted	 riverbank.	 He	 reminded	 himself	 that	 memories	 should	 not	 blunt	 the
sharpness	 of	 his	 weapons.	 He	 was	 a	 Kshatriya	 and	 war	 was	 his	 dharma.
Hopefully,	Abhimanyu	would	not	be	wearing	that	pearl	necklace	when	he	faced
him	on	the	battlefield.
*****

54 			RULES	OF	WAR
	
“PITAMAHA,	HOW	CAN	ANYONE	PREDICT	what	will	happen	in	the	course	of	battle?”

Suyodhana	asked,	bewildered	by	the	words	of	the	document	in	front	of	him.	He
and	Yudhishtra	had	been	summoned	to	the	patriach’s	chambers	to	agree	to	the
codes	 of	 war.	 Suyodhana	 looked	 up	 impatiently,	 wondering	 if	 this	 was	 just
another	trick	by	his	wily	cousin.	He	felt	only	pity	for	Yudhishtra,	who	wished
to	impose	the	old	rules	of	varna	on	his	people.	And	the	rules	Bhishma	was	now
reading	aloud,	belonged	to	an	era	which	should	have	been	finished	and	buried
long	 ago.	 Once	 the	 war	 was	 won,	 Suyodhana	 vowed	 to	 himself	 that	 change
would	come.
Yudhishtra	sat	reading	the	ancient	codes	and	ethics	governing	warfare	from	a
birch	leaf	manuscript	as	the	cousins	faced	each	other	in	Bhishma’s	chamber.	A
lone	 lamp	 lighted	 their	 faces.	 In	 the	 shadows,	 Vidhura	 stood	 with	 lines	 of
worry	creasing	his	forehead.
“I	am	ready	to	take	the	oath,	Pitamaha,”	Yudhishtra	said.
“People	who	have	no	intention	of	following	the	rules	are	the	first	to	agree	to
them,”	Suyodhana	retorted	disdainfully.
Bhishma	brought	 his	 hand	 down	on	the	table,	making	the	lamp	flame	flicker.
Both	cousins	bowed	their	heads.	Vidhura	picked	up	the	birch	leaf	and	handed	it
over	to	Bhishma.
“This	is	not	a	casual	game	of	dice,	this	is	war.	The	two	of	you	have	destroyed
the	 peace	 of	 this	 land	 with	 your	 petty	 rivalry.	 Even	 now	 you	 cannot	 stop
bickering.	 This	 is	 the	 ancient	 code	 of	 conduct	 in	 war,	 written	 by	 our	 great
rishis	and	seers.	We	are	not	Mlechas.”
“I	 have	 always	 believed	 in	 dharma,	 Pitamaha,”	 Yudhishtra	 said,	 raising	 his
head.	Suyodhana’s	lips	curved	in	a	smile	of	derision.

“Once	I	have	read	it	aloud,	I	would	like	both	of	you	to	take	the	oath	by	placing
a	 hand	 over	 the	 flame.”	 Bhishma	 waited	 for	 either	 of	 his	 grand-nephews	 to
speak.	When	there	was	no	response,	he	began	reading.
“Rule	1:	All	battles	shall	begin	after	sunrise	and	end	at	sunset	precisely.	Rule	2:
A	group	of	warriors	shall	not	attack	a	single	warrior.	Rule	3:	In	a	duel,	both
warriors	shall	use	the	same	type	of	weapon	and	be	mounted	or	remain	on	foot
alike.”
“How	 is	 it	 possible	 to	 ensure	 such	 a	 thing	 in	 the	 heat	 of	 battle?”	 Yudhishtra
asked,	his	broad	brow	creased	in	confusion.
“What	is	so	difficult,	cousin?	A	warrior	on	foot	fights	only	another	warrior	on
the	ground.	A	mounted	warrior	fights	only	another	who	is	mounted,	a	chariot
fights	only	another	chariot,	and	an	elephant	another	elephant,”	Suyodhana	said.
Bhishma	nodded	and	continued.	“Rule	4:	If	a	warrior	surrenders,	he	shall	not
be	harmed	or	killed.	He	shall	be	extended	the	respect	due	to	a	prisoner	of	war
and	his	wounds	shall	be	treated	by	the	Vaidyas	of	the	capturing	side.	Are	both
of	you	clear	about	this?”
The	cousins	nodded.	Bhishma	adjusted	the	wick	of	the	lamp	and	moved	closer
to	the	light.	“Rule	5:	An	injured	or	unarmed	warrior	shall	not	be	killed.	Rule	6:
An	 unconscious	 warrior	 shall	 not	 be	 harmed.	 Rule	 7:	 Water	 carriers,
drummers,	Vaidyas	and	their	assistants,	scribes	reporting	to	their	commanders
or	 rulers,	 who	 are	 not	 warriors	 but	 present	 on	 the	 battlefield,	 shall	 not	 be
harmed	or	killed.”
“What	if	they	are	spies?”	Suyodhana	asked.
“Either	 side	 may	 ask	 the	 other	 to	 remove	 from	 the	 battlefield	 any	 man
suspected	of	being	a	spy,	and	allow	a	replacement	to	be	made.”
“Are	 such	 elaborate	 rules	 really	 necessary,	 or	 even	 practical?”	 Suyodhana
asked	Bhishma.
“I	fear	for	those	under	your	command,	Suyodhana,	if	you	have	not	yet	grasped
the	 scale	 and	 complexity	 of	 this	 war.	 From	 north	 to	 south,	 armies	 are
marshalling	 to	 fight	 on	 one	 side	 or	 the	 other.	 Before	 it	 ends,	 death	 and

detruction	 will	 stalk	 this	 land.	 The	 world	 has	 never	 seen	 anything	 like	 it	 and
God	 willing,	 never	 will	 again.	 There	 will	 be	 at	 least	 eighteen	 akhshounis	 in
combat.	Do	you	want	to	fight	without	rules?”
Both	 sides	 were	 still	 trying	 to	 assess	 each	 other ’s	 strength.	 Alliances	 were
being	forged	every	day.	The	numbers	were	overwhelming.
“Rule	8:	No	warrior	shall	kill	or	injure	another	by	striking	from	behind.	Rule
9:	No	warrior	shall	attack	a	woman.”
“That	 is	 surely	 ridiculous.	 Are	 women	 even	 allowed	 to	 fight?”	 Yudhishtra
asked	with	a	smile.
Bhishma	put	down	the	birch	leaf	and	stared	at	the	Pandava	Prince.	“You	are	a
scholar,	 Yudhishtra.	 I	 trust	 you	 have	 read	 history.	 It	 will	 serve	 you	 well	 to
remember	Durga.”
“But	she	was	a	Goddess,	Pitamaha,	not	an	ordinary	woman.”
“Do	not	forget	that	every	woman	has	the	same	strength	within	her.	She	is	not	a
thing	to	be	pawned.”	Yudhishtra	looked	away,	ashamed.	“Or	to	be	stripped	in
public,”	 added	 Bhishma.	 It	 was	 Suyodhana’s	 turn	 to	 flush	 and	 drop	 his	 gaze.
“Rule	 10:	 No	 warrior	 shall	 strike	 a	 horse	 or	 elephant	 if	 his	 life	 is	 not
threatened.”
“Even	the	animals	have	rules?”	Suyodhana	asked.
“Only	men	break	the	rules,	Suyodhana,	not	the	animals.	Every	life	is	precious,
be	it	an	ant	or	a	human.	So	no	animal	shall	be	injured	unnecessarily.	Rule	11:
The	 rules	 specific	 to	 each	 weapon	 shall	 be	 followed.	 A	 warrior	 shall	 not	 be
attacked	or	killed	when	his	bow	has	broken	or	he	is	disarmed.	In	a	mace	fight,
the	warriors	shall	not	hit	below	the	waist.”
“Pitamaha,	we	know	these	basic	rules	of	combat;	they	were	the	first	lessons	we
were	 taught	 in	 warrior	 training	 at	 the	 age	 of	 five,”	 Yudhishtra	 smiled	 at	 the
stern-faced	patriarch.
“There	 is	 no	 harm	 in	 reminding	 ourselves,	 Yudhishtra.	 The	 final	 rule	 is	 to
fight	fairly,	in	the	true	spirit	of	dharma.	Kurukshetra	is	the	temple	of	dharma.

History	 will	 not	 forgive	 or	 forget	 those	 who	 break	 the	 rules	 of	 dharma.
Remember,	 the	 battlefield	 is	 one	 of	 life’s	 great	 levellers.	 It	 does	 not	 matter
whether	you	are	bareheaded	or	wear	a	crown.	Neither	the	Gods	nor	men	can
escape	the	laws	of	karma.”
Bhishma	put	the	birch	leaf	back	on	the	table	and	looked	at	his	grand-nephews.
Both	sat	with	bowed	heads.	 There	was	no	going	back	now.	 After	 a	 moment’s
silence,	 the	 old	 man	 put	 out	 his	 hands	 over	 the	 flame	 of	 the	 lamp	 saying,
“Repeat	after	me...”
Yudhishtra	was	the	first	to	put	out	his	hand.	Bhishma	waited	for	Suyodhana	to
follow.
“Pitamaha,	if	I	give	my	word	I	must	then	abide	by	it.	I	fear	that	in	the	heat	of
battle	I	may	not	always	be	able	to	follow	my	oath.”
“Your	cousin	has	agreed	and	he,	too,	is	a	man	of	honour,	I	hope.	You	are	my
grand-nephews,	 scions	 of	 the	 Kuru	 dynasty,	 inheritors	 of	 the	 legacy	 of	 the
great	Emperor	Bharata.	Our	dynasty	has	given	its	name	to	our	holy	land.	You
are	all	Bharatas.	Let	your	conduct	be	worthy.	Now,	repeat	after	me...”
Suyodhana	placed	his	hand	over	the	naked	flame	but	cringed	when	his	fingers
touched	 those	 of	 his	 cousin.	 Bhishma’s	 voice	 filled	 the	 room	 as	 his	 grandnephews	repeated	his	words,	the	flame	of	truth	their	witness.
“Om.	 In	 the	 name	 of	 Brahma,	 Vishnu	 and	 Maheshwara,	 in	 the	 name	 of	 the
Goddess	Adi	Parasakthi,	the	mother	of	the	universe,	in	the	name	of	the	seven
sacred	rivers	of	Bharata,	in	the	name	of	all	the	mothers	of	this	holy	land,	in	the
name	of	truth	and	honour,	in	the	name	of	dharma,	 I,	Gangadutta	Devavrata...”
Bhishma	paused	for	the	cousins	to	speak	their	names	and	then	continued,	“...do
hereby	take	the	oath	of	honour,	and	promise	to	abide	by	the	ancient	and	sacred
rules	of	dharmayudha;	that	my	men	and	I	shall	fight	according	to	the	teachings
of	dharma.	I	enter	the	battlefield	with	the	full	knowledge	that	this	war	is	sacred,
as	 is	 every	 particle	 of	 sand	 in	 holy	 Bharatavarsha.	 I	 shall	 not	 contemplate	 or
commit	any	act	not	in	accordance	with	dharma.	I	shall	strive	to	uphold	what	is
right	and	win	or	lose	with	honour.”
When	 his	 grand-nephews	 had	 repeated	 the	 complete	 vow,	 Bhishma	 sat	 back

with	a	sigh.	The	die	was	cast.	Death	and	glory	beckoned	the	brave.	Yudhishtra
and	Suyodhana	bowed	and	took	their	leave	without	looking	at	each	other.
Suyodhana	 was	 a	 worried	 man.	 He	 felt	 angry	 at	 the	 way	 Bhishma	 had
manipulated	him.	The	Pitamaha	meant	well,	but	he	was	sure	Yudhishtra	would
not	 follow	 the	 rules	 he	 had	 so	 blithely	 agreed	 to.	 Even	 if	 his	 cousin	 was	 a
changed	man,	as	some	claimed	him	to	be,	Krishna	would	follow	his	own	rules.
Suyodhana	 knew	 he	 faced	 a	 ruthless	 enemy	 who	 would	 stoop	 to	 any	 level	 to
secure	victory.
Suyodhana	stood	still	in	the	corridor	outside	Bhishma’s	chambers.	Intricately
carved	 pillars	 stood	 like	 sentinals	 on	 either	 side,	 stretching	 as	 far	 as	 the	 eye
could	 see.	 He	 saw	 his	 cousin	 quickly	 walking	 away.	 The	 ancient	 and	 noble
dynasty	 of	 the	 Kurus	 had	 always	 been	 known	 to	 set	 the	 highest	 standards	 of
rightful	 conduct	 by	 Kshatriyas.	 He	 was	 a	 Kuru	 scion	 and	 he	 could	 not
dishonour	his	forefathers	by	going	back	on	his	given	word.	‘Yudhishtra,	even
if	 you	 break	 every	 rule	 to	 win,	 evil	 Duryodhana	 will	 not,	 whatever	 be	 the
provocation,’	he	murmured	to	himself.
***
Vidhura	 put	 away	 the	 precious	 parchments	 and	 looked	 up	 at	 Bhishma	 to	 take
his	 leave.	 Suddenly	 Bhishma	 felt	 a	 searing	 pain	 and	 slumped	 forward,
clutching	his	chest.	Vidhura	rushed	forward	saying,	“Sir,	what	has	happened?
Should	I	summon	the	Royal	Physician?”
Bhishma	 rose	 slowly,	 leaning	 heavily	 on	 the	 table.	 Vidhura	 steadied	 the
shaking	 lamp.	 “It	 is	 nothing,	 nothing,	 my	 son.	 My	 time	 has	 not	 yet	 come...”
Acool	 breeze	 was	 blowing	 but	 Bhishma’s	 face	 shone	 with	 perspiration.	 “Oh,
do	not	fret,	Vidhura,	it	is	just	lack	of	exercise.	I	must	start	training.”
Vidhura	 assisted	 the	 old	 warrior	 to	 his	 bed	 and	 then	 left	 reluctantly.	 Bhishma
rested	 a	 hand	 on	 his	 chest.	 The	 pain	 refused	 to	 go	 away.	 There	 was	 no	 cure
other	 than	 death.	 But	 he	 could	 not	 go	 yet...	 He	 had	 to	 live	 to	 ensure	 that	 his
grand-nephews	did	not	make	a	mockery	of	what	he	had	stood	for	all	his	life.
He	 had	 suffered	 many	 heartaches...	 he	 would	 live	 through	 this	 one,	 too.	 The
great	war	for	dharma	was	about	to	begin.	Death	would	have	to	wait.

*****

55			DHARMAKSHETRA
	
SUYODHANA	SURVEYED	THE	BATTLEFIELD	from	his	chariot.	As	far	as	the	eye	could

see,	armies	stretched	on	either	side.	The	air	was	rich	with	the	pungent	odour	of
horse	and	elephant	dung.	Soon,	the	stench	of	blood	and	gore	would	mix	with
them.	Vultures	had	alighted	on	the	treetops,	patiently	awaiting	their	reward.	It
was	the	smell	of	war,	of	death	and	devastation.	Horses	neighed	in	excitement
and	 the	 ground	 reverberated	 with	 the	 tread	 of	 elephants.	 Waves	 of	 cheering
rose	on	both	sides	as	captains	galloped	along	the	ranks,	barking	orders	to	their
troops.	A	dry	breeze	carried	fine	sand	from	the	barren	lands	to	the	south-west,
and	Suyodhana	shielded	his	eyes	from	its	sting.	He	stood	tall	and	twanged	his
bowstring.	His	army	roared.	One	way	or	another,	this	would	be	his	final	role
as	warrior.
As	Suyodhana	gauged	the	men	on	both	sides,	so	eager	to	kill	and	die,	he	felt	a
pang	 of	 guilt.	 Was	 he	 doing	 the	 right	 thing	 by	 imposing	 such	 a	 war	 on	 his
people,	already	reeling	under	the	onslaught	of	drought	and	famine?	But	what
was	the	alternative?	Should	he	have	given	away	his	birthright	to	the	illegitimate
sons	of	Kunti,	allowing	them	to	impose	rules	that	would	divide	society?	If	the
oppressive	 jati	 system	 of	 the	 Southern	 Confederate	 was	 the	 future	 of
Bharatavarsha,	then	this	war	was	worth	fighting.	He	was	not	sure	he	would	win,
but	 fight	 he	 would	 to	 his	 last	 breath.	 He	 wanted	 the	 throne;	 he	 had	 stopped
feeling	guilty	about	that	long	ago.	He	wanted	it	for	his	people	as	much	as	for
himself.	 Once,	 when	 Karna	 had	 asked	 him	 why	 he	 so	 blatantly	 admitted	 this
selfish	 desire,	 Suyodhana	 had	 said	 that	 it	 made	 him	 feel	 more	 human.	 No
ambition	 was	 purely	 selfless	 or	 selfish,	 acknowledging	 it	 honestly	 to	 oneself
made	 life	 much	 simpler.	 To	 Karna’s	 embarrassment,	 he	 had	 told	 him	 that	 he
had	acted	on	impulse,	prompted	by	a	sense	of	justice	when	he	had	made	him,	a
Suta,	King	of	Anga.	But	later,	when	he	had	thought	about	it,	he	admitted	there
had	also	been	an	element	of	selfishness	in	the	act.	He	had	wanted	Karna	to	fight
for	him	and	be	a	deterrent	to	Arjuna.	Karna	had	protested,	professing	eternal
friendship,	but	Suyodhana	had	replied	that	no	one	could	predict	the	future.	The

words	had	been	uttered	half	in	jest,	but	now	they	proved	to	be	the	simple	truth.
Karna	was	not	by	his	side	when	he	needed	him	the	most.
Bhishma	was	about	to	sound	the	conch	to	start	the	battle	when	a	chariot	from
the	Pandava	side	rushed	into	the	middle	of	the	vast	field.	It	halted	between	the
battle-ready	armies.	Bhishma	raised	his	hand	to	signal	a	halt.	The	emblem	on
the	 chariot’s	 flag	 had	 Hanuman	 –	 it	 was	 Arjuna’s	 chariot!	 Why	 was	 the
Pandavas’	 most	 celebrated	 warrior	 taking	 the	 huge	 risk	 of	 exposing	 himself,
wondered	Suyodhana,	his	brow	furrowed	under	his	crested	helmet.	One	arrow
from	the	massed	ranks	could	take	Arjuna	down.	But	he	had	given	his	word	to
Bhishma	that	there	would	be	no	transgression	of	the	codes	of	war.	He	too	lifted
his	arm	to	halt	his	men.
Bhishma’s	 gaze	 met	 Arjuna’s	 across	 the	 field	 of	 battle.	 He	 raised	 a	 hand	 in
benediction	upon	his	grand-nephew,	saying,	“Vijayai	Bhava”.	 Suyodhana	saw
the	 gesture	 and	 seethed	 with	 rage.	 Where	 did	 the	 old	 man’s	 loyalty	 rest,	 with
the	 army	 he	 commanded	 or	 the	 illegitimate	 sons	 of	 Kunti?	 Had	 Karna’s
removal	been	a	deliberate	ploy?	Suyodhana’s	troubled	gaze	travelled	to	Drona,
who	 was	 looking	 at	 Arjuna	 and	 Krishna.	 Were	 the	 Guru’s	 eyes	 shining	 with
admiration	 for	 his	 favourite	 disciple?	 Were	 they	 all	 making	 a	 fool	 of	 him?
Who	was	there	on	his	side	whom	he	could	trust	implicitly?	Shalya	was	Nakula
and	 Sahadeva’s	 uncle.	 Kritavarma	 was	 the	 Commander	 of	 Krishna’s	 famed
Narayana	Sena.	And	who	could	predict	what	Kripa	would	or	would	not	do?	He
was	 unsure	 of	 his	 Uncle	 Shakuni	 and	 his	 brother-in-law,	 Jayadratha.	 Yes,	 his
brothers	would	stand	by	him.	But	the	only	person	he	could	trust	completely	in
the	whole	army	was	Aswathama.	How	he	wished	Karna	was	with	him!	The	war
appeared	unwinnable,	but	it	was	too	late	to	retreat.
As	 Suyodhana	 looked	 at	 the	 ordinary	 foot	 soldiers	 who	 had	 no	 agenda	 other
than	to	serve	him,	a	 lump	formed	 in	his	 throat.	 What	 had	he	 done	 to	deserve
their	love?	His	treasury	was	almost	empty	and	they	had	not	been	paid	for	two
weeks.	On	the	other	side,	Yuyutsu	was	tempting	everyone	with	fantastic	gifts	in
this	 world	 and	 Krishna	 was	 offering	 heaven	 in	 the	 next.	 His	 opponents	 had
everything	 –	 money,	 the	 Confederate	 forces	 looting	 the	 countryside	 for
supplies,	 an	avatar	 who	 inspired	 fear	 of	 hell	 and	 promised	moksha,	 and	 spin
masters	 who	 portrayed	 their	 side	 as	 the	 epitome	 of	 dharma	 and	 him	 as	 the
devil.	 Yet,	 Suyodhana,	 who	 had	 little	 to	 offer,	 still	 had	 eleven	 akhshounis
against	 the	 Pandava’s	 seven.	 People	 were	 still	 ready	 to	 die	 for	 their	 Crown

Prince,	evil	or	righteous.
Suyodhana	 laughed	 at	 the	 irony.	 His	 men	 were	 daring	 the	 priests	 and
philosophers	of	the	land	who	had	made	their	lives	miserable.	They	had	aligned
under	 his	 leadership,	 rejecting	 Yuyutsu’s	 money	 and	 Krishna’s	 moksha,
laughing	at	the	priests	who	tried	to	scare	them	with	the	promise	of	hell	and	an
endless	cycle	of	lives	as	worms,	women	or	untouchables.	They	had	trusted	him
over	the	peddlers	of	dharma,	ready	to	fight	on	half	empty	stomachs,	willing	to
die	so	that	their	children	could	have	a	better	tomorrow.	The	responsibility	and
trust	they	had	reposed	in	him	felt	overwhelming.	Fight	he	would,	and	win.	He
was	a	man	with	human	frailties,	but	his	dreams	were	big.	Such	dreams	should
not	wither	away,	else	there	would	be	no	hope	for	his	country	or	the	world.
Suyodhana	gripped	his	mace	and	said	a	prayer.	He	felt	inexplicably	powerful.
Dharma	 was	 on	 his	 side	 and	 dharma	 would	 win.	 He	 was	 ready	 to	 fight.	 He
looked	over	at	Arjuna,	expecting	to	encounter	a	look	of	defiant	hatred	from	the
Pandava.	To	his	surprise,	he	saw	Arjuna	throw	down	his	bow	and	collapse	to
the	floor	of	his	chariot.
*****

56			THE	SCEPTIC
	
AS	 ARJUNA	 GAZED	 AT	 THE	 VAST	 ARMIES	 on	 both	 sides,	 ready	 to	 drench	 the	 earth

with	blood,	he	was	overcome	by	despair	and	despondency.	He	threw	down	his
bow	and	sat	in	his	chariot,	his	head	bent,	his	shoulders	stooped.
“Krishna,	 when	 I	 see	 Pitamaha,	 my	Gurus	and	my	kin	standing	facing	me	 on
the	other	side,	my	throat	feels	parched	with	sorrow,	my	heart	sinks.	What	sins
am	 I	 to	 commit?	 They	are	my	kin,	after	all,	these	warriors	of	the	Kuru	race,
and	you	are	asking	me	to	slay	them!	How	can	I	shoot	my	Pitamaha,	who	has
always	 loved	 me?	 How	 can	 I	 fight	 Guru	 Drona,	 whose	 affection	 for	 me	 is
greater	than	his	love	for	his	own	son?	My	Uncle	Shalya	is	opposing	me,	so	are
so	 many	 others	 I	 have	 always	 loved	 and	 respected.	 Duryodhana	 may	 be
arrogant	and	brash,	but	he	is	my	cousin.	Does	not	the	throne	belong	to	him	by
right?	Am	I	not	the	bandit	trying	to	steal	it	from	him?	I	cannot	fight,	Krishna.	It
is	better	they	kill	me	and	take	everything	from	us.	For	if	we	win,	I	will	not	be
able	to	sleep	with	so	much	blood	on	my	hands.	The	kingdom	is	not	worth	it.
Nothing	 is	 worth	 this	 bloody	 war	 that	 you	 are	 urging	 me	 to	 fight.	 Leave	 me
alone,	Vasudeva.	I	do	not	want	to	fight.”
Krishna	 looked	 down	 at	 his	 friend	 and	 put	 a	 hand	 on	 Arjuna’s	 shoulder.
“Arjuna,	you	are	deluded	by	false	compassion.	You	are	haunted	by	imaginary
fears.	Listen	to	me.”
“No,	 Krishna.	 You	 want	 me	 to	 kill	 my	 own	 people,	 the	 Kurus.	 Have	 you	 not
heard	that	with	the	death	of	the	warriors	of	a	kula,	the	customs	of	that	race	are
lost?	When	customs	are	lost,	women	go	astray.	They	become	free	without	their
masters	 and	 the	 intermingling	 of	 castes	 can	 occur.	 Their	 sons	 are	 kulaheen,
without	caste,	and	ineligible	to	do	pitrukarma	for	their	ancestors.	If	their	sons
do	 not	 perform	 the	 last	 rites,	 the	 souls	 of	 all	 the	 Kuru	 warriors	 will	 descend
into	 hell.	 It	 is	 sin,	 sin,	 sin.	 I	 will	 not	 fight	 my	 own	 people.	 What	 enmity	 do	 I
have	with	the	warriors	fighting	just	for	their	livelihood?	No,	do	not	make	me

commit	such	a	crime.”
“Arjuna,	 do	 not	 be	 effeminate.	 You	 are	 being	 deluded	 by	 false	 compassion.
You	are	inviting	infamy.	Future	generations	will	call	you	a	coward	for	running
away	from	battle.”
“Krishna,	 have	 you	 too	 not	 run	 from	 the	 battlefield,	 years	 before,	 unable	 to
face	the	wrath	of	the	great	Jarasandha?”
“I	retreated	as	a	strategy,	not	from	cowardice.	You	are	being	a	coward,	Arjuna.
All	this	talk	of	compassion	is	just	an	excuse	to	hide	your	fear	of	failure.”
“Krishna,	how	can	 bhakti	towards	 one’s	Guru	be	called	cowardice?	 How	 can
you	call	devotion	to	Pitamaha	illusion?	If	I	can	hear	the	cries	of	widows	and
children	in	my	ears,	and	if	my	soul	tells	me	there	is	no	need	for	this	war,	how
am	I	a	coward?	It	takes	more	courage	to	walk	away	from	here	than	to	fight	in	a
war	in	which	I	no	longer	believe,”	Arjuna	retorted,	dismay	and	sorrow	filling
his	heart	in	equal	measure.
Krishna	 smiled	 at	 the	 anger	 flaring	 in	 Arjuna.	 Good,	 his	 words	 were
awakening	the	warrior	in	his	friend.	“Arjuna,	you	mourn	for	those	who	do	not
deserve	to	be	mourned.	There	is	nothing	worse	than	false	sympathy.	You	talk
like	the	atheists	who	believe	they	are	wise	but	are,	in	fact,	misled	souls.	Your
words	may	sound	right	superficially,	but	that	is	because	you	are	not	using	your
intellect	to	delve	deeper.	Death	is	just	a	part	of	life.”
“I	do	not	understand,	Krishna.”
“Partha,	 just	 as	 boyhood,	 youth	 and	 old	 age	 are	 in	 one’s	 body	 and	 manifest
themselves	 at	 the	 appropriate	 time,	 so	 is	 death.	 But	 what	 dies	 is	 born	 again.
That	is	the	eternal	law	of	karma.	Death	and	birth	are	like	day	and	night.	Do	we
mourn	the	night	when	we	rejoice	at	the	birth	of	a	new	day?	To	the	wise,	just	as
day	and	night	are	part	of	nature,	so	are	life	and	death.”
“Krishna,	you	trivialise	death.	I	can	understand	death	when	its	time	comes,	but
not	murder.	You	are	asking	me	to	kill.	It	is	not	dharma.”
Krishna	 waved	 his	 arms	 at	 the	 vast	 Kuru	 and	 Pandava	 armies	 and	 said,	 “You
think	 you	 can	 kill	 them	 or	 they	 can	 kill	 you?	 You	 doubt,	 because	 you	 do	 not

know	 who	 you	 are.	 You	 are	 not	 the	 body;	 you	 and	 your	 body	 are	 separate.
Understand	that	the	body	is	just	a	garment	that	hides	the	real	you;	the	body	is
just	 a	 covering	 for	 the	 atman,	 the	 soul.	 The	 soul	 is	 eternal	 and	 unchanging.
There	is	no	death	for	the	soul.	Just	as	you	change	your	clothes	when	they	are
dirty,	soiled	or	torn,	the	soul	changes	bodies.	Death	is	nothing	but	the	casting
away	of	old	clothes	by	the	divine	atman.”
“What	good	would	it	do	to	my	soul	to	fight	this	war	and	win	a	kingdom,	since
it	 would	 be	 my	 body	 that	 would	 enjoy	 the	 pleasures	 of	 kingship	 and	 feel	 the
pain	 of	 killing	 my	 kinsmen?	 Should	 I	 fight	 for	 the	 enjoyment	 of	 my	 body,
which	is	just	a	cloth	waiting	to	be	cast	aside?	If	only	the	atman	matters,	what
good	 would	 this	 victory	 do	 me?	 Am	 I	 not	 being	 foolish	 to	 tend	 to	 my	 body,
when	I	should	be	feeding	my	soul?”
“Understand	that	the	soul	cannot	be	drowned	by	water,	cleaved	by	the	sword	or
burned	by	fire.	You	cannot	destroy	it	when	you	kill	someone,	neither	can	your
enemy	destroy	your	 atman.	Atman	is	 the	 reflection	 of	 the	paramatman	 which
pervades	 the	 universe	 and	 beyond.	 Life	 is	 just	 a	 manifestation	 of	 the
paramatman,	as	transient	as	the	reflection	of	the	moon	on	the	waves	of	a	lake,
and	as	real.	Life	is	nothing	but	a	flash	that	happens	in	the	interval	between	birth
and	 death.	 Imagine	 the	 vast	 universe	 and	 the	 majesty	 of	 time,	 and	 you	 will
understand	life	is	as	permanent	as	the	flicker	of	a	leaf	in	the	breeze.	When	you
cannot	kill	the	soul,	why	be	obsessed	with	the	thought	of	hurting	others?”
Arjuna	shook	his	head	in	defeat.	“Krishna,	despite	what	you	say,	I	cannot	be	the
cause	of	so	much	death	and	misery.”
Krishna	 replied,	 “Arjuna,	 you	 will	 bring	 infamy	 to	 all	 the	 warriors	 of
Bharatavarsha	by	refusing	to	do	your	dharma	as	a	Kshatriya.	There	is	nothing
else	 greater	 for	 a	 Kshatriya	 than	 a	 battle	 fought	 fairly.	 Heaven	 awaits	 the
Kshatriya	who	dies	in	battle.	By	abandoning	the	chariot	of	war,	you	will	bring
infamy	to	the	Kurus.	Is	infamy	not	equal	to	death?	Do	you	wish	to	be	called	a
coward	 by	 everyone?	 Slain,	 you	 will	 attain	 heaven	 in	 another	 world;
victorious,	you	will	enjoy	heaven	in	this	world.	What	have	you	got	to	lose	by
fighting,	my	dear	friend?”
“Oh	 Krishna,	 do	 not	 make	 me	 commit	 this	 sin.	 Iravan’s	 face	 still	 haunts	 me.
Abhimanyu	is	dearer	to	me	than	anything	in	the	world.	It	would	be	the	same	for

Duryodhana.	 What	 will	 I	 do	 if	 I	 lose	 Abhimanyu?	 I	 have	 wronged
Duryodhana’s	son	once	already;	how	will	I	face	myself	if	I	kill	his	son?	How
will	 I	 face	 my	 Guru	 if	 I	 kill	 Aswathama?	 Karna	 is	 my	 enemy,	 but	 now	 I	 can
understand	that	we	have	wronged	him	as	much	as	he	has	wronged	us.	Let	this
madness	end.	Let	all	the	infamy	be	mine.”
“My	 dear	 friend,	 you	 are	 getting	 attached	 to	 this	 illusionary	 world	 and	 its
meaningless	 bonds.	 You	 are	 forsaking	 your	 duty	 for	 you	 are	 afraid	 of	 the
results.	You	are	afraid	of	your	actions,	thinking	you	will	get	entangled	in	the
bonds	of	your	karma.	Consider	pleasure	and	pain,	victory	and	defeat,	gain	and
loss,	life	and	death,	as	equal	and	insignificant.	Fight	the	battle	in	the	name	of
duty.	Be	devoted	to	your	cause	and	dharma;	do	not	worry	about	the	outcome.”
“But,	 Krishna,	 it	 is	 the	 outcome	 that	 matters.	 If	 not,	 why	 do	 people	 strive
repeatedly	 until	 they	 succeed?	 Why	 succeed	 at	 all	 if	 the	 outcome	 does	 not
matter?	I	am	afraid	of	the	results	if	I	succeed	in	this	war.	I	fear	that	death	and
universal	suffering	would	be	the	only	outcome.	Should	I	not	worry	about	that?
Am	I	an	unthinking	monster?”
“Do	your	duty	without	desiring	the	fruit	of	your	actions.	You	will	free	yourself
from	the	obligation	of	repeated	births	and	deaths.”
“I	love	life	and	this	is	a	beautiful	world.	Why	should	I	kill	my	brethren	in	order
to	reach	a	place	where	there	is	neither	happiness	nor	pain?	Why	should	I	strive
to	become	a	stone,	unmoved	by	anything,	existing	just	because	it	happens	to	be
there?	That	is	not	life.”
“Arjuna,	be	the	man	who	is	unmoved	by	circumstances	and	just	does	his	duty.
Be	like	the	lotus	which,	though	it	blooms	in	the	water,	is	never	wet.	Similarly,
bloom	 in	 your	 karma	 but	 never	 get	 drenched	 by	 it,	 or	 overwhelmed	 by	 its
results.	Be	a	stithapranja,	devoted	to	your	dharma	and	duty.”
“Even	if	it	involves	misery	for	others?”
“Do	not	get	attached	to	the	results	of	your	work.	Be	devoted	to	the	work	alone.
Misery	is	an	illusion.”
“If	work	creates	 misery,	why	 work	 at	all,	Krishna?	Why	not	abstain	from	all

duties	and	take	refuge	in	the	forest	like	the	rishis?”
“A	man	deludes	himself	if	he	thinks	that	by	renouncing	his	duties	he	can	escape
the	 snare	 of	 karma.	 No	 one	 can	 live	 without	 working.	 The	 intelligent	 man
knows	not	to	get	attached	to	the	results	of	one’s	work	and	to	do	it	as	one’s	duty,
nishkama	karma.”
“But	it	seems	so	unnatural	to	live	without	passion,	Krishna.”
“My	friend,	such	thoughts	belong	to	evil	souls	like	your	cousin,	Duryodhana,
who	are	attached	to	the	world	and	indulge	their	passions	and	senses.	That	is	the
mark	of	tamo	guna,	the	quality	of	darkness,	their	imperfect	knowledge	which
will	cause	their	ruin.”
“But	Duryodhana	can	 say	 the	same	thing,	that	he	is	doing	his	duty,	to	 protect
what	he	believes	is	his	birthright.	Is	it	not	his	Kshatriya	dharma	to	fight?	Why
should	it	be	an	evil	quality	in	him	and	noble	in	me?”
“Duryodhana	fights	for	desire;	he	is	consumed	by	wrath	and	jealousy.”
“So	are	we.	This	war	is	the	result	of	our	desire	for	vengeance	for	what	he	did
to	Draupadi.	We	too	are	filled	with	passion,	wrath	and	human	emotion.”
“I	 advise	 you	 to	 discard	 all	 anger	 and	 wrath	 towards	 Duryodhana,	 and	 fight
because	it	is	your	duty	to	restore	dharma.	Once	you	overcome	your	anger,	you
will	also	overcome	your	false	sense	of	attachment	towards	your	kin.”
“If	I	outgrow	the	anger	I	feel	about	Duryodhana’s	treatement	of	Draupadi,	then
there	 is	 no	 reason	 left	 to	 fight.	 What	 would	 become	 of	 me?	 I	 would	 be	 but	 a
killing	machine.”
“You	would	be	a	yogi	who	has	conquered	the	senses.	The	senses	are	superior
to	an	inert	body,	the	mind	is	superior	to	the	senses	and	the	intellect	is	superior
to	the	 mind.	You	must	be	the	 man	who	 walks	the	path	of	intellect.	That	is	the
path	of	devotion	to	one’s	cause.	This	is	a	secret	I	told	Vivaswat	aeons	ago,	he
declared	it	to	Manu,	the	first	man,	and	Manu	told	Ishvaku	of	Suryavamsha,	and
through	 many	 thousand	 generations	 it	 has	 passed	 to	 the	 sages.	 Now	 I	 am
declaring	it	to	my	friend,	Arjuna.”

“You	are	my	friend,	we	are	the	same	age.	Vivaswat	was	born	at	the	beginning
of	creation.	Manu	was	the	first	man.	How	could	 you	tell	them	what	you	have
just	told	me?”
“Many	 births	 of	 mine	 have	 passed,	 as	 have	 yours.	 But	 my	 essence	 knows	 no
deterioration.	 I	 take	 birth	 in	 every	 age,	 whenever	 there	 is	 a	 loss	 of	 piety	 and
adharma	 arises,	 to	 protect	 the	 weak	 and	 oppressed.	 I	 arrive	 in	 this	 world	 to
finish	evil	men	like	Duryodhana.”
“I	 am	 confused,	 Krishna.	 If	 you	 are	 omniscient,	 you	 should	 know	 what
adharma	is.	If	you	are	omnipresent,	why	take	birth	at	all	or	come	to	the	world,
when	you	yourself	are	the	world?	If	you	are	omnipotent,	why	create	evil	at	all?
Why	 create	 adharma	 if	 you	 have	 the	 power	 of	 creation	 and	 destruction?	 If
adharma	 is	 a	 mistake,	 then	 you	 are	 not	 omnipotent	 or	 omniscient.	 But	 if	 you
created	adharma	by	design,	then	you	are	not	the	compassionate	Supreme	Soul,
having	known	the	suffering	that	would	ensue.
It	 reeks	 of	 sadism.	 If	 adharma	 arose	 on	 its	 own	 and	 you	 have	 to	 fight	 to
vanquish	 it,	 you	 are	 not	 omnipotent	 but	 just	 like	 any	 of	 us	 lesser	 mortals.
Krishna,	if	you	are	the	Supreme	Essence	of	the	world,	and	adharma	exists	in	it,
it	 merely	 shows	 that	 the	 world	 that	 is	 you,	 is	 imperfect.	 If	 the	 world	 is
imperfect,	then	so	are	you.”
Krishna	laughed	in	genuine	amusement.	“You	talk	like	a	wise	philosopher,	my
friend.	 But	 suffering	 also	 is	 an	 illusion.	 Pain	 and	 pleasure	 are	 part	 of	 the
natural	rhythm	of	the	world.	A	lion	kills	a	deer;	the	lion’s	dharma	is	to	kill	to
eat,	the	dharma	of	the	deer	is	to	run	and	escape.	One	does	not	exist	without	the
other.	I	come	to	the	world	as	the	protector	of	dharma	when	the	balance	changes
towards	adharma.	I	am	Duryodhana	and	I	am	Arjuna.	I	am	Yudhishtra	and	I	am
Shakuni.	 Dharma	 and	 adharma	 are	 but	 different	 manifestations	 of	 the	 same
energy.	What	is	dharma	today	will	be	adharma	tomorrow.	That	is	why	a	yogi
does	not	bother	about	the	results	of	any	action.”
“There	are	many	men	who	have	abandoned	action	and	sit	in	contemplation	in
the	forests.”
“They	 follow	 the	 difficult	 path	 of	 knowledge,	 of	sankhya.	 Yoga	 is	 the	 easier
path;	 devotion	 to	 one’s	 duty	 without	 worrying	 about	 results.	 You	 will	 not	 be

bound	by	the	fruits	of	those	actions.”
“Then	the	responsibility	will	be	yours,	Krishna?	For	any	sin	I	commit,	for	any
atrocities?”
“It	is	your	nature	that	engages	in	action.	I	receive	no	one’s	sin	nor	their	merit.
But	I	do	reside	in	you	and	everything	animate	or	inanimate.	Listen	to	yourself
and	 you	will	know	what	your	duty	is.	The	four	varnas	I	have	created	are	not
based	 on	 birth	 but	 the	 nature	 of	 human	 beings.	 Those	 who	 walk	 the	 path	 of
knowledge	 are	 Brahmins,	 those	 who	 take	 the	 path	 of	 action	 are	 Kshatriyas,
those	who	travel	the	path	of	devotion	are	Vaishyas,	and	those	who	indulge	in
sensory	 pleasures	 are	 Shudras,	 destined	 to	 serve	 all	 others.	 As	 long	 as	 the
world	exists,	there	will	be	divisions.	The	strong	will	try	to	dominate	the	weak.	I
appear	 when	 the	 balance	 is	 disturbed,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 perfect	 balance	 in	 the
world.	Perfection	is	stillness,	perfection	is	death.	A	wheel	that	does	not	move	is
useless.	I	am	the	axle	of	the	wheel	of	dharma.	Knowledge	is	the	pin.	What	is	at
the	top	today	will	be	at	the	bottom	tomorrow.	The	 dharmachakra	moves	with
time,	forward	and	cyclically.”
“Krishna,	I	am	a	warrior.	Your	words	are	all	too	difficult	for	me	to	understand.
I	am	 confused.	Is	there	no	meaning	to	life	 then?	 What	 is	the	purpose	 of	 life?
Are	 we	 just	 cogs	 in	 the	 wheel	 of	 dharma,	 travelling	 cyclically	 without	 any
purpose?”
“Move	to	the	center	with	knowledge,	devotion	and	contemplation,	and	be	one
with	 me.	 Though	 the	 axle	 is	 the	 main	 part	 of	 wheel,	 it	 does	 not	 move.
Similarly,	a	devotee	who	has	escaped	the	cycle	of	birth	and	rebirth,	from	the
wheel	where	dharma	and	adharma	keep	changing	places,	finds	refuge	in	me	as
the	axle	of	the	dharmachakra.	When	 such	a	person	becomes	one	with	me,	he
can	 see	 that	 the	 rotation	 of	 the	 wheel	 is	 just	 a	 rhythm	 and	 that	 dharma	 and
adharma	are	parts	of	the	same	wheel.”
“Most	 of	 what	 you	 say	 eludes	 my	 understanding.	 Every	 time	 I	 ponder	 over
what	you	have	said,	I	find	a	different	meaning.	It	sounds	logical	when	I	hear	it,
but	 I	 am	 an	 ordinary	 man	 and	 when	 confronted	 with	 the	 realities	 of	 life,	 I
forget	your	lessons.	I	find	that	instead	of	striving	to	become	a	stitapranja,	it	is
easier	to	cry	when	I	feel	sad,	to	laugh	when	I	feel	happy,	to	shout	when	I	am
angry	and	to	embrace	when	I	feel	love.	I	find	it	far	more	exhilarating	to	be	part

of	the	wheel,	even	a	tiny	dot	on	it,	but	always	in	motion.	In	my	deluded	mind,	I
feel	 it	 would	 be	 dull	 being	 part	 of	 the	 axle.	 It	 is	 more	 wonderful	 to	 keep
moving	with	the	wheel	than	be	still	with	the	axle.”
Krishna	 laughed	 again.	 He	 saw	 that	 the	 armed	 ranks	 standing	 on	 either	 side
were	getting	restive,	but	he	had	one	more	important	lesson	to	teach	his	friend
who	was	so	passionate	about	life.
“Arjuna,	fight	and	win	the	world.	Do	your	duty.”
“No,	Krishna.	My	doubts	remain	uncleared.”
Krishna	 sighed.	 “I	 will	 give	 you	 a	 simple	 formula	 –	 easier	 than	 the	 path	 of
sankya,	or	the	path	of	devotion	to	duty.	Yoga	is	the	path	of	bhakti	–	be	devoted
to	me.	Perform	every	act	as	a	prayer	to	me.”
“How	can	I	act	when	I	fear	the	outcome	of	my	action?”
“Think	Idam	na	mama,	this	action	does	not	belong	to	me.	Do	it	as	an	offering
to	me,	as	a	prayer	to	Krishna.”
“Who	are	you,	Krishna?”
“Arjuna,	think	of	me	at	all	times.	Fix	your	mind	and	understanding	on	me	and
fight	 the	 battle.	 Attain	 me	 and	 be	 freed	 from	 the	 cycle	 of	 birth	 and	 death.	 I
pervade	 space;	 all	 entities	 are	 in	 me.	 Behold	 my	 divine	 power.	 Worship	 me,
always	 glorify	 me,	 and	 strive	 with	 firm	 vows.	 Worship	 me	 through	 your
nishkama	karma,	worship	me	through	your	bhakti,	and	attain	me	through	your
knowledge.	I	am	the	Vedic	sacrifice,	I	am	the	smrithis,	I	am	swadha,	I	am	the
medicament	 of	 herbs,	 I	 am	 the	 mantra,	 I	 am	 the	 fire.	 I	 am	 the	 offering	 in
sacrifice,	I	am	the	father	of	the	universe,	I	am	the	mother.	I	am	OM.	Through
your	renuniciation	and	devotion	be	released	from	the	cycle	of	karma	and	come
to	me.	None	devoted	to	me	is	ever	lost.”
Arjuna	 looked	 at	 his	 friend	 in	 bewilderment.	 “Krishna,	 I	 have	 never	 really
known	you.	Show	me	the	real	you.”
“Behold	 me,	 son	 of	 Kunti.	 Behold	 the	 suns	 of	 different	 universes,	 behold
Rudra,	 the	 Aswins	 and	 Maruts	 and	 other	 demigods.	 See	 the	 entire	 universe.

Behold	my	sovereign	mystic	nature.	Behold	Time.”
Arjuna	 blinked	 as	 Krishna	 lifted	 his	 hand.	 He	 wondered	 if	 he	 had	 been
hallucinating.	He	felt	he	was	in	a	trance.	“Yes,	I	see	you...	without	beginning	,
middle	or	end.	You	are	of	innumberable	arms,	and	the	sun	and	moon	are	your
eyes.	The	world	is	trembling.	I	see	all	the	sons	of	Dhritarashtra	entering	your
fierce	 mouth	 and	 all	 the	 warriors	 of	 our	 side	 as	 well.	 I	 see	 everyone	 being
crushed,	everyone	rushing	to	you	like	moths	to	a	flame.	You	are	the	energy	of
the	universe.	I	see	all	my	foes	dead.”
“Now	wisdom	has	dawned	in	your	mind.	I	have	already	slain	all	the	warriors.
You	are	just	an	instrument.	Do	not	worry	about	the	outcome.	Fight	and	defeat
your	foes.”	Krishna	settled	back	in	the	charioteer ’s	seat	and	took	up	the	reins.
Arjuna	raised	his	conch	and	blew	it,	signalling	the	start	of	the	war.	For	the	next
eighteen	 days,	 he	 would	 shoot	 where	 Krishna	 pointed.	 Though	 assailed	 by
doubts	 and	 moved	 by	 his	 actions,	 he	 would	 strive	 to	 kill	 without	 worrying
about	the	end	result,	trusting	in	his	friend’s	wisdom.	But	later,	when	the	wheel
of	karma	turned,	he	would	forget	all	the	lessons	Krishna	had	instilled	in	him	in
the	temple	of	dharma.
*****

57			THE	FIRST	EIGHT	DAYS
	
ELEVEN	 KAURAVA	 AKSHAUHINIS	

faced	 seven	 on	 the	 Pandava	 side.	 Yuyutsu’s
caravan	 supplying	 food	 and	 armaments	 stretched	 behind	 the	 Pandava	 lines.	 It
would	make	all	the	difference.	Winter	had	set	in	and	the	sun	above	was	weak.	A
depressing	 mist	 pervaded	 the	 battlefield	 and	 a	 cold	 wind	 made	 the	 warriors
shiver	 as	 they	 stamped	 their	 feet	 and	 clanged	 their	 swords	 and	 shields.
Bhishma’s	silver	chariot	stood	in	the	middle.	The	wind	tossed	his	white	mane
and	 played	 with	 his	 banner	 emblazoned	 with	 the	 golden	 palm	 tree	 and	 five
stars.	When	he	heard	Arjuna’s	conch,	he	addressed	his	troops.
“The	 heaven	 of	 warriors	 beckons	 you,	 bravehearts.	 Do	 not	 worry	 about	 the
future.	 It	 is	 our	 duty	 to	 fight	 and	 die	 if	 needed.	 This	 war	 is	 for	 our	kula	 and
desha,	for	dharma	and	Bharatavarsha.	Dharma	will	win.	Never	forget	the	tenets
of	war.	Fight	bravely,	fight	fairly.”	His	soldiers	cheered	at	his	words.
Far	away,	Karna	sat	depressed	and	alone	in	his	camp	as	the	war	cries	reached
him.	He	was	the	only	warrior	kept	away	from	the	battle.	His	bitter	mind	wished
Bhishma	a	speedy	death.
Drona	 and	 Kripa	 led	 the	 army	 from	 the	 right	 and	 left	 flanks	 respectively.
Aswathama	 and	 Sushasana	 protected	 Bhishma’s	 flanks.	 Shalya,	 Madri’s
brother,	the	maverick	warrior	who	had	chosen	to	side	with	Suyodhana	against
his	nephews,	Nakula	and	Sahadeva,	stood	in	his	chariot,	a	wicked	grin	on	his
face.	Fearless	and	wreckless,	Shalya	was	a	warrior	who	could	turn	the	tide	of
battle.	 He	 was	 feared	 for	 his	 unpredictable	 actions	 and	 formidable	 fighting
skills.	Suyodhana	was	at	the	centre,	under	his	banner	of	two	coiling	serpents,
choosing	 not	 to	 fight	 under	 any	 divine	 emblems.	 This	 war	 was	 for	 the
forgotten	people	of	his	country.	The	nagas	were	also	a	tribute	to	Ekalavya.
Arjuna	 arranged	 his	 phalanx	 in	 the	 vajra	 formation,	 suitable	 for	 swift,
penetrating	 attacks.	 Yudhishtra	 was	 at	 the	 centre,	 with	 Bhima	 and

Dhristadyumna	guarding	his	flanks.	Yuyutsu’s	mercenary	army	had	joined	the
Pandavas,	swelling	their	ranks.
When	 the	 sun	 had	 lost	 its	 blush	 and	 the	 mist	 reluctantly	 lifted	 off	 the	 grass,
Bhishma’s	stentorian	voice	boomed	over	the	battlefield,	“Attack!”	The	days	of
carnage	had	begun.	The	war	of	dharma	would	have	many	twists	and	turns	but	it
gave	no	thought	to	the	parched	countryside	reeling	under	drought.
The	 first	 day	 belonged	 to	 the	 Kauravas.	 Despite	 the	 help	 of	 Yuyutsu’s
mercenary	 army,	 Bhishma	 wiped	 out	 an	 entire	 Pandava	 akhshouni.	 Uttara,
Prince	of	Virata,	was	killed.	But	on	the	second	day,	the	King	of	Kalinga,	who
had	broken	away	from	the	Southern	Confederate	to	support	Karna,	was	killed.
By	the	end	of	the	third	day,	the	Pandavas	had	managed	to	create	disarray	in	the
Kaurava	ranks.	Bhishma’s	conservative	approach	had	demoralised	the	Kaurava
ranks	and	Suyodhana	had	the	first	of	his	many	arguments	with	the	Pitamaha.
At	the	end	of	the	fourth	day,	Suyodhana	stormed	into	Bhishma’s	camp	accusing
him	 of	 siding	 with	 the	 Pandavas.	 Bhishma	 refused	 to	 respond,	 leaving
Suyodhana	fuming.	It	was	becoming	increasingly	evident	that	the	old	man	was
not	 fighting	 to	 win.	 Ordinary	 soldiers	 were	 dying	 like	 flies	 but	 no	 warrior
belonging	to	the	Kuru	clan	had	died	on	either	side	by	the	fifth	day.	Bhishma’s
undeclared	strategy	was	to	make	the	war	unviable	for	both	sides	and	somehow
force	 a	 truce.	 The	 war	 dragged	 on	 for	 the	 sixth	 and	 seventh	 days,	 with
thousands	of	ordinary	soldiers	dying;	still	not	a	single	Kuru	on	either	side	was
laid	 low.	 It	 seemed	 that	 Bhishma’s	 strategy	 had	 indeed	 paid	 off	 when
Yudhishtra,	moved	by	the	sight	of	so	many	dead,	pleaded	with	Krishna	to	stop
the	 war.	 In	 the	 Kaurava	 camp,	 Bhishma	 stood	 like	 a	 wall,	 unmindful	 of	 the
desperate	pleas	of	Suyodhana	to	kill	Arjuna	or	Yudhishtra,	and	gain	victory.
The	eighth	day	was	a	decisive	turning	point	in	the	great	war.	Krishna	directed
the	Pandava	Commander,	Dhristadyumna,	to	attack	the	Gandharan	forces.	This
resulted	in	the	death	of	many	of	Shakuni’s	men,	including	one	of	his	sons.	An
infuriated	 Shakuni	 led	 twelve	 of	 Suyodhana’s	 brothers	 deep	 into	 Pandava
territory	 but	 retreated	 when	 the	 attack	 could	 not	 be	 sustained.	 While	 Shakuni
himself	 escaped	 unscathed,	 the	 Pandavas	 killed	 the	 dozen	 Kaurava	 Princes,
escalating	the	war	to	a	new	level,	from	which	there	was	no	turning	back.	The
fighting	had	gone	beyond	Bhishma’s	power	to	control.	His	promise	not	to	spill
any	royal	blood	sounded	hollow	even	to	his	own	ears.

Karna	 attended	 the	 funeral	 of	 Suyodhana’s	 twelve	 brothers.	 He	 advised	 his
grieving	 friend	 to	 remove	 Bhishma	 as	 Commander	 before	 they	 lost
everything.	 Bereft	 and	 enraged,	 Suyodhana,	 accompanied	 by	 Aswathama,
stormed	into	Bhishma’s	camp	to	give	the	patriarch	a	final	ultimatum.
*****

58			TRAITOR
	
BHISHMA	 DID	 NOT	 LOOK	 AT	 SUYODAHANA.	Perhaps	Pitamaha	had	thought	that	by

allowing	his	brothers	to	die,	he	would	force	a	truce,	thought	the	Crown	Prince,
his	 mind	 ablaze	 with	 anger,	 his	 heart	 filled	 with	 grief.	 Suyodhana	 was
convinced	 that	 Bhishma	 was	 fighting	 a	 sham	 war	 and	 not	 attacking	 the
Pandavas.	 He	 had	 tried	 to	 protect	 the	 Kaurava	 brothers	 too,	 but	 now,	 after
Shakuni’s	disastrous	foray	into	the	Pandava	lines	and	the	death	of	twelve	of	his
brothers,	Suyodhana	was	in	no	mood	to	forgive.
“Pitamaha,	it	has	been	eight	days	since	the	war	started.”
A	physician	was	dressing	Bhishma’s	wounds.	Aswathama	stood	in	the	shadows.
“And?”	 Bhishma	 asked,	 flexing	 his	 arm.	 The	 physician	 requested	 him	 not	 to
move	 his	 hand	 until	 the	 next	 day.	 The	 patriarch	 merely	 looked	 at	 him	 in
irritation.	 The	 physician	 clucked	 his	 tongue	 in	 defeat	 and	 hastily	 walked	 out
after	a	cursory	bow.
“There	seems	to	be	no	end	in	sight,”	Suyodhana	said.
“You	can	always	stop	it,”	Bhishma	replied,	lifting	an	eyebrow.
“But	we	are	not	winning,	even	with	you	in	command.”
“We	are	not	losing	either.”
“Pitamaha,	twelve	of	my	brothers	are	dead	and	you	tell	me	we	are	not	losing?
We	should	allow	Karna	to	fight.”
Bhishma’s	 eyes	 turned	 to	 his	 nephew,	 burning	 with	 fury.	 “What	 is	 it	 that	 you
ask,	Suyodhana?	That	we	let	a	Suta	fight	our	battles	for	us?”
“Pitamaha,	 we	 all	 know	 you	 are	 not	 allowing	 the	 men	 to	 go	 after	 any	 of	 the

Pandavas.”
“Are	 you	 telling	 me	 how	 to	 conduct	 the	 war,	 Suyodhana?	 Are	 you	 here	 to
perhaps	instruct	me	on	strategy?”
“So	many	have	already	died.”
“Oh,	 so	 many	 have	 died?	 What	 was	 it	 you	 expected	 when	 you	 started	 this
foolishness?	You	will	be	sick	of	death	and	destruction	long	before	this	ends.”
“I	 want	 the	 Pandavas	 dead.	 You	 are	 protecting	 Arjuna.	 Unless	 we	 take	 him
down,	this	will	never	end.”
“Are	 you	 accusing	 me	 of	 disloyalty?”	 Bhishma	 asked	 softly,	 taking	 a	 step
forward	 to	 stand	 inches	 from	 Suyodhana.	 “I	 am	 not	 a	 slave	 you	 won	 in	 a
gambling	game,	nephew.	I	chose	to	fight	on	my	own	terms.	If	I	have	not	killed
any	Pandava,	I	have	not	allowed	you	to	be	killed,	either.”
“My	brothers	are	dead,	Pitamaha,	we	must	win	this	war	and	end	it	quickly.	The
casualties	are	mounting	and	the	drought	situation	has	worsened.	More	people
are	dying	on	the	streets	without	food	than	are	being	slain	in	Kurukshetra.”
“Would	you	like	a	truce?”
“No,	not	after	what	they	have	done;	not	when	I	know	what	they	would	do	to	my
people	if	they	win.”
Bhishma	took	a	deep	breath.	“Then	what	is	it	that	you	want?”
“Kill	Arjuna.”
“No,	 I	 will	 not	 allow	 any	 of	 my	 grand-nephews	 to	 die.	 All	 of	 you	 are	 my
blood,	the	sons	I	never	had.”
“Were	 not	those	 who	died	your	grand-nephews,	 too,	Pitamaha?	 Or	were	they
not	 important	 because	 they	 were	 Dhritarashtra’s	 sons	 and	 evil	 Duryodhana’s
brothers?	 Allow	 Karna	 to	 fight!	 He	 is	 not	 related	 to	 anyone	 and	 he	 will	 not
have	such	qualms.”

“This	is	not	Karna’s	war.	I	do	not	want	a	Suta	to	fight	under	me.”
“Pitamaha,	 I	 know	 that	 is	 not	 your	 real	 reason.	 There	 are	 Kiratas,	 Nagas,
Asuras,	Rakshasas	and	Nishadas	fighting	in	our	army.	Perhaps	you	are	afraid
Karna	will	achieve	what	you	could	not?”
“I	have	nothing	left	to	prove	anymore,	Suyodhana.	Not	to	you	and	certainly	not
to	Karna.”
“Pitamaha,	 the	 soldiers	 are	 saying	 I	 do	 not	 care	 for	 their	 lives.	 Any	 more	 of
this	and	we	will	have	a	mutiny	on	our	hands.”
Bhishma	stared	at	Suyodhana	and	then	turned	away	in	silence.
“Pitamaha,	give	me	an	answer.	Should	we	summon	Karna?”
“No,	Karna	is	impulsive	and	could	change	everything.”
“If	Arjuna	goes	down,	Yudhishtra	will	sue	for	peace,	demand	a	truce.	Arjuna
must	be	killed	before	the	sun	sets	tomorrow.”
“I	will	defeat	him,”	Bhishma’s	words	barely	reached	Suyodhana.
“He	has	to	die,	Pitamaha.”
Bhishma	 sat	 on	 his	 spartan	 bed,	 waiting	 for	 Suyodhana	 and	 Aswathama	 to
leave.	Finally,	they	bowed	and	left	the	old	man	alone.	The	pain	in	his	chest	had
returned.	 His	 hands	 were	 shaking.	 He	 had	 lived	 too	 long	 for	 anyone’s	 good.
‘Ma	 Ganga,	 your	 son	 has	 become	 a	 burden	 to	 all.’	 Tomorrow,	 he	 would	 kill
Arjuna	 and	 be	 done	 with	 it.	 If	 that	 was	 the	 price	 for	 saving	 his	 country,	 he
would	do	it.	Or	perhaps	he	would	sacrifice	himself	instead.
*****

59			LIABILITY	OF	CONSCIENCE
	
THE	 NINTH	 DAY	 BELONGED	 TO	 BHISHMA.	 The	 grand	 old	 Commander	 was	 like	 a

natural	 force	 –	 a	 hurricane,	 a	 rampaging	 elephant,	 a	 tidal	 wave.	 His
commanders	 executed	 various	 attacking	 formations	 like	 krauncha	 vyuha,
garuda	vyuha	and	sarpa	vyuha	at	lightning	speed.	From	opposite	flanks,	Drona
and	 Kripa	 attacked	 the	 Pandavas	 and	 drove	 Arjuna’s	 akhshounis	 to	 face	 the
central	 thrust	 of	 Bhishma’s	 attack.	 Aswathama	 cut	 off	 Bhima’s	 men	 from	 the
main	body,	while	Kritavarma	pinned	down	Drupada’s	men.
By	 afternoon,	 Bhishma	 had	 penetrated	 deep	 into	 Arjuna’s	 akhshounis.	 Twice,
Arjuna	 found	 himself	 face	 to	 face	 with	 his	 grand-uncle.	 Both	 times	 Bhishma
cut	 off	 Arjuna’s	 bow	 with	 contemptuous	 ease.	 He	 had	 two	 opportunities	 to
shoot	at	a	weaponless	Arjuna,	but	the	old	warrior	waited	for	his	opponent	to
pick	 up	 his	 spare	 bow.	 Krishna	 managed	 to	 rescue	 Arjuna	 by	 skilful	 driving,
getting	the	chariot	away	from	Bhishma	both	times.
The	sun	was	about	to	set	and	Bhishma	did	not	wish	to	take	any	more	chances.
The	war	had	to	end.	He	deployed	his	yantramuktha	astras	and	blasted	his	way
through	 Arjuna’s	 defences.	 With	 needlepoint	 precision,	 his	 hastamuktha
arrows	 destroyed	 Arjuna’s	 cache	 of	 weapons.	 For	 the	 third	 time	 that	 day,
Arjuna	found	himself	helpless	before	the	old	warrior.
“Krishna,	I	cannot	find	my	Gandiva.	The	moment	I	touch	my	bow,	Pitamaha’s
arrow	 will	 kill	 me.”	 Weapons	 lay	 scattered	 on	 the	 chariot	 floor	 and	 acrid
smoke	stung	Arjuna’s	eyes.
Krishna	looked	at	Bhishma,	standing	poised	to	shoot	his	final	arrow	at	Arjuna.
The	war	was	almost	lost	for	the	Pandavas.
Krishna	 whipped	 the	 horses	 and	 the	 chariot	 lunged	 towards	 Bhishma,	 taking
him	by	surprise.	Bhishma’s	charioteer	veered	and	Krishna	shot	past.

Bhishma’s	chariot	turned	and	gave	chase.	The	two	chariots	weaved	through	the
fighting	 men,	 parting	 the	 elephant	 corps	 and	 shattering	 the	 ordered	 ranks	 of
cavalry.	Warriors	stopped	fighting	to	watch	the	deadly	chase.
With	a	sudden	jerk,	Krishna	turned	his	chariot.	Bhishma’s	charioteer	pulled	at
the	reins	with	both	hands.	The	chariots	stood	facing	each	other.	Bhishma	was
deep	inside	the	Pandava	lines,	cut	off	from	his	men.	The	Pandava	army	closed
in.	Krishna	had	trapped	Bhishma	but	the	seasoned	warrior	stood	rock	steady	in
his	chariot,	his	face	calm,	his	muscles	taut.	He	shot	an	arrow,	knocking	the	pin
out	of	one	of	Arjuna’s	chariot	wheels.	The	wheel	rolled	away	and	the	chariot
tilted	to	one	side,	throwing	Arjuna	off	balance.
Krishna	 jumped	 down	 from	 his	 seat	 and	 rushed	 to	 Arjuna.	 “Pick	 up	 your
Gandiva,	 it	 is	 behind	 you,”	 he	 yelled	 urgently,	 pointing	 at	 Bhishma.	 Arjuna’s
grasping	hand	found	the	bow	and	instantly	he	was	back	on	his	feet,	bow	at	the
ready,	to	shoot	back	at	Bhishma.	But	Bhishma	had	put	down	his	bow	and	was
standing	unarmed.
“Kill	 him	 now!”	 Krishna	 urged,	 but	 Arjuna	 hesitated	 to	 shoot	 the	 unarmed
Pitamaha.
“Arjuna,	the	sun	has	set.	I	have	stopped	fighting	as	per	the	rules	of	war.	We	will
meet	tomorrow,”	Bhishma	said.
Arjuna	put	down	his	Gandiva	and	bowed	to	his	grand-uncle.
“What	are	you	hesitating	for?	Kill	him!”	Krishna	urged	yet	again.	But	Arjuna
shook	his	head	and	walked	back	to	his	broken	chariot.
“You	 have	 forgotten	 all	 your	 lessons,	 Arjuna.	 If	 you	 do	 not	 kill	 him,	 I	 will,”
Krishna	 declared.	 He	 raised	 the	 fallen	 wheel	 of	 the	 chariot	 from	 the	 ground
and	held	it	above	his	head,	ready	to	throw	it	at	Bhishma.
Bhishma	did	not	blink.	He	just	gazed	back	at	Krishna,	his	hands	folded.	“I	am
honoured	 to	 die	 at	 your	 hands,	 Krishna.	 Kill	 me	 if	 you	 wish,	 but	 protect
dharma.”
The	 wheel	 fell	 from	 Krishna’s	 hands,	 raising	 a	 cloud	 of	 dust.	 He	 nodded	 his
head	 and	 followed	 Arjuna.	 Bhishma’s	 chariot	 turned	 around.	 The	 Pandava

army,	which	had	surrounded	him,	parted	to	let	the	Commander	of	the	Kaurava
army	pass.	Bhishma	felt	content	Arjuna	had	not	shot	him	as	he	stood	unarmed.
Neither	had	Krishna	flung	the	chariot	wheel	at	him.	There	was	still	hope	for	the
country.	Both	sides	were	fighting	according	to	the	traditions	of	war.
As	dusk	crept	over	Kurukshetra,	Bhishma	passed	Iravan’s	severed	head	on	the
pole.	 Once	 again,	 sorrow	 and	 doubt	 seized	 his	 soul.	 The	 grand	 old	 man	 of
Bharata	took	a	deep	breath	and	prayed,	‘May	dharma	win.’
That	night,	in	the	camp,	Suyodhana	confronted	Bhishma	again,	questioning	his
actions,	accusing	him	of	disloyalty.	Why	had	he	not	shot	Arjuna	when	he	had
had	the	chance?	Bhishma	asked	whether	Suyodhana	preferred	the	dishonour	of
winning	by	ignoring	the	rules	of	warfare?	Suyodhana	had	no	answer.
As	 Bhishma	 and	 Suyodhana	 argued	 on	 about	 the	 ethics	 of	 war,	 unknown	 to
them,	a	ruthless	conspiracy	was	being	hatched	in	the	Pandava	camp	to	bring	the
patriarch	down.
*****

60			EUNUCH	SHIELD
	
MIST	 CRAWLED	 FROM	 THE	 RIVER,	giving	an	eerie	feel	to	the	night.	The	howls	of

jackals	 rose	 and	 fell.	 The	 flapping	 of	 vulture	 wings	 could	 be	 heard	 as	 they
feasted	in	the	dark.	Even	the	music	of	Krishna’s	flute	could	not	transcend	the
dread	in	the	Pandavas’	minds	as	they	sat	around	the	fire	warming	their	hands.
Finally,	Krishna	put	away	his	flute	and	chided	Arjuna	for	not	killing	Bhishma
when	he	had	the	chance.
Arjuna	merely	shook	his	head.	The	war	was	nearly	lost.	Duryodhana	stood	on
the	verge	of	victory.	“I	see	no	way	to	stop	Pitamaha.	The	way	he	is	leading	the
army	 sends	 shivers	 down	 my	 spine.	 What	 is	 the	 use?	 Even	 if	 Pitamaha	 goes,
there	 are	 Drona,	 Kripa,	 Karna,	 Aswathama	 and	 Duryodhana	 to	 reckon	 with.
The	list	is	endless.”
“Patience,	 Arjuna.	 One	 person	 at	 a	 time.	 Let	 us	 deal	 with	 Bhishma	 first.	 We
must	trap	him	into	using	his	own	vows.”	Krishna	tapped	the	flute	at	his	waist,	a
smile	on	his	lips,	waiting	for	the	Pandavas	to	speak.
“How	do	we	do	that?”	asked	Dharmaputra	Yudhishtra.
“He	would	never	fight	a	woman...”
“I	 will	 fight	 him	 then.	 I	 cannot	 forget	 his	 silence	 when	 the	 Kauravas	 tried	 to
strip	 me	 in	 the	 Sabha,”	 said	 Draupadi.	 No	 one	 could	 doubt	 her	 courage	 or
willingness	to	fight.
“Oh,	 Draupadi,	 the	 real	 man	 among	 the	 Pandavas.	 But	 it	 cannot	 be	 you,	 my
dear.	We	cannot	field	a	woman	against	Pitamaha.”
“You	are	contradicting	yourself,	Krishna,”	Yudhishtra	pointed	out.
“Oh	future	King	of	Hastinapura,	calm	your	mind.	Why	do	you	worry	when	I

am	 with	 you?”	 Krishna	 put	 a	 hand	 on	 Yudhishtra’s	 shoulder.	 Then	 he	 turned
and	called,	“Shikandi!”
The	 eunuch	 walked	 in	 and	 the	 Pandavas	 gasped.	 “It	 would	 be	 demeaning	 for
Bhishma	to	fight	Shikandi.	We	can	also	claim	he	is	not	a	woman,	so	we	have
not	broken	the	rules	of	war.	Arjuna	could	stand	behind	and...“
“No!”	Arjuna	shouted,	revolted	by	the	very	idea	of	such	subterfuge.
“Arjuna,	there	is	no	other	way.	Dharma	must	triumph.”
“No,	not	like	this!	Not	against	the	man	who	has	always	been	fair	to	everyone.
Not	by	hiding	like	a	coward	behind	this	creature.”
“Then	 let	 Duryodhana	 become	 King	 and	 you	 can	 go	 into	 exile	 for	 another
thirteen	years.”
“Krishna,	let	me	fight!	Bhishma	will	not	see	tomorrow’s	sunset.	Let	me	fight
Drona,	who	professed	love	for	Arjuna,	yet	when	the	time	came,	sided	with	evil.
Let	me	fight	that	unscrupulous	son	of	the	Guru	and	claim	the	precious	stone	he
wears.	Let	me	fight	Kripa,	let	me	fight	all	the	men	who	remained	silent	when	I
was	being	shamed,”	Draupadi	said	fiercely,	her	long	hair	blowing	wildly	in	the
wind.
Krishna	took	Shikandi’s	arm	and	walked	out.	Draupadi	would	take	care	of	the
others.	It	was	unfortunate	but	there	was	no	other	way	to	stop	Duryodhana	from
winning.
“For	decades,	one	dream	has	possessed	me	–	to	kill	Bhishma	and	avenge	my
mother ’s	 death.	 I	 am	 grateful	 for	 this	 opportunity,	 Lord	 Krishna.	 I	 am	 your
humble	servant,”	Shikandi	said.
“Good,	but	you	must	be	at	your	feminine	best	tomorrow.”
“I	 will	 charm	 the	 old	 man,	 just	 wait	 and	 watch,”	 Shikandi	 replied	 with	 a	 coy
look.
An	owl	hooted	in	the	dark	and	another	answered.	Their	hooting	went	on	and	on
until	the	eastern	horizon	grew	grey	with	weariness.

***
Even	 Draupadi	 could	 not	 make	 Arjuna	 change	 his	 mind.	 The	 next	 day,	 his
vyagra	vyuha	formation,	which	remained	in	waiting,	struck	back	whenever	the
enemy	least	expected	it,	alternating	lightning	strikes	with	a	languid	pace,	which
confused	 the	 Kaurava	 army.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 in	 nine	 days,	 the	 battle	 turned
against	 the	 Kauravas.	 Arjuna	 effectively	 used	 the	 yantra	 muktha	 missiles	 to
strike	 deep	 into	 the	 enemy	 ranks.	 By	 afternoon,	 he	 had	 slain	 seven	 more	 of
Dhritarashtra’s	sons.
By	late	afternoon,	Bhishma	struck	back.	By	killing	the	Kaurava	Princes,	Arjuna
had	 crossed	 an	 invisible	 line	 and	 there	 was	 nothing	 now	 to	 hold	 back	 the
veteran	general.	Vyali	vyuha,	the	dragon	formation,	was	 Bhishma’s	answer	 to
Arjuna.	 He	 moved	 around	 his	 chariots	 holding	 the	 yantramuktha	 missiles,
spitting	fire	into	the	enemy	ranks	while	the	elephant	corps	wreaked	devastation.
He	 followed	 it	 by	 a	 quick	 cavalry	 attack,	 like	 the	 lash	 of	 the	 dragon’s	 tail.
Bhishma	was	within	hailing	distance	from	Arjuna	when	dusk	spread	its	mantle
over	the	battlefield.
When	 Pitamaha’s	 first	 arrow	 struck	 Arjuna’s	 shoulder,	 he	 was	 shocked.
“Krishna,	 Pitamaha	 has	 reached	 me	 again.”	 Another	 arrow	 missed	 Arjuna’s
throat	by	a	hair ’s	breadth.
“Die	 a	 fair	 death	 and	 leave	 your	 wives	 at	 Duryodhana’s	 mercy,”	 Krishna
suggested	in	a	flat	tone.
“Call	 that	 creature!”	 Arjuna	 shouted	 as	 another	 arrow	 knocked	 off	 his
headgear.	 He	 knew	 they	 were	 warning	 shots.	 The	 next	 one	 would	 pierce	 his
throat.
“Shikandi!”	Krishna	called	and	the	eunuch	jumped	into	the	chariot.
They	turned	and	rushed	towards	Bhishma.	Something	exploded	behind	them	–
another	 of	 Bhishma’s	 powerful	 weapons.	 Time	 was	 running	 out.	 Bhagadatta,
King	of	Kamarupa,	cut	across	their	path	on	 his	war	elephant,	trying	to	block
them.	 Krishna	 wove	the	chariot	past,	lashing	the	elephant	with	his	whip	as	he
rushed	past.	The	elephant	trumpeted	in	pain	and	grabbed	at	them	with	its	trunk.
They	barely	escaped	its	maddened	fury.

Arjuna	 saw	 Bhishma	 standing	 in	 his	 chariot,	 his	 bow	 drawn.	 His	 arrow	 tip
caught	the	setting	sun	and	looked	like	it	was	on	fire.	Shikandi	moved	to	stand
in	 front	 of	 Arjuna.	 The	 smell	 of	 the	 jasmine	 flowers	 the	 eunuch	 wore	 made
him	 want	 to	 vomit.	 Shikandi	 began	 making	 lewd	 gestures	 at	 Bhishma.	 The
Pitamaha’s	blazing	eyes	said	it	all.	He	 put	down	 his	bow	and	 stood	staring	 at
them.	Shakuni	hurled	the	choicest	and	the	most	obscene	abuse	as	their	chariot
halted	a	few	feet	away	from	Bhishma.	Arjuna	flinched	when	he	looked	into	his
granduncle’s	eyes.	The	look	of	disappointment	and	sorrow	in	those	eyes	would
remain	with	Arjuna	till	the	end	of	his	days.
“Shoot!”	Krishna	ordered.	Looking	away,	Arjuna	shot	Bhishma.	The	eunuch’s
shrill	laughter	echoed	round	him.	Still	hiding	behind	the	eunuch,	Arjuna	shot
the	 next	 arrow.	 He	 was	 so	 close	 he	 could	 hear	 his	 arrow	 pierce	 Bhishma’s
body.	 He	 shut	 his	 eyes	 and	 shot	 another	 arrow.	 Shikandi	 kept	 screaming
obscenities.	 Not	 a	 cry	 of	 pain,	 not	 an	 accusation,	 not	 a	 reproach,	 not	 even	 a
word	of	advice	escaped	Bhishma’s	lips.	Scores	of	arrows	pierced	his	body,	yet
the	grand	old	man	of	Bharata,	the	son	of	Ganga,	refused	to	fall	and	die.	And	he
refused	to	raise	his	weapon	against	a	perceived	woman.
Arjuna	 recoiled	 in	 disgust	 when	 Shikandi’s	 lips	 kissed	 his	 cheeks.	 He	 knew
what	 it	 meant.	 Pitamaha	 had	 fallen.	 Bhishma	 lay	 on	 a	 bed	 of	 arrows	 –	 his
arrows.	 More	 than	 fifty	 arrows	 had	 pierced	 his	 body.	 Shikandi	 danced	 round
the	 fallen	 figure	 in	 wild	 abandon,	 howling	 with	 laughter	 and	 making	 bawdy
gestures.
‘Oh,	Krishna,	what	have	you	made	me	do?’	Arjuna	cried	in	silent	anguish,	his
heart	 filled	 with	 grief.	 But	 his	 friend	 was	 watching	 Shikandi’s	 bizarre	 dance
with	a	slight	smile.	Arjuna	rushed	to	Bhishma	and	fell	at	his	feet.	“Forgive	me,
Pitamaha...”
“My	son...”	Bhishma	turned	his	head	away.
The	 celebrations	 continued	 around	 the	 fallen	 Commander.	 The	 victorious
warrior	sat	sobbing	at	Bhishma’s	feet,	trying	to	find	solace	in	Krishna’s	advice
that	the	soul	was	immortal	and	nobody	could	kill	anyone.	Then	why	did	he	not
feel	 detached	 from	 his	 actions?	 If	 dharma	 had	 prevailed,	 why	 did	 his	 heart
drown	in	sorrow?	“Forgive	me...”	Arjuna	wept,	kneeling	beside	Bhishma	who
lay	on	his	bed	of	arrows.

When	Suyodhana	heard	the	news,	the	darkness	blotted	out	his	vision.	Had	his
constant	accusations	caused	the	Pitamaha	to	fall?	The	throne	they	were	fighting
over	 belonged	 to	 Bhishma.	 Suyodhana	 felt	 he	 was	 as	 much	 responsible	 for
Bhishma’s	death	as	his	cousin,	Arjuna.	His	words	had	been	sharper	than	any	of
Arjuna’s	arrows.
As	 darkness	 fell	 over	 Kurukshetra,	 Suyodhana	 knew	 it	 was	 time	 to	 recall
Karna.	His	friend	was	not	bound	by	any	false	sense	of	duty	to	the	Pandavas.	He
had	 risked	 the	 wrath	 of	 the	 priests	 and	 earned	 infamy	 for	 Karna,	 whom	 he
loved	 more	 than	 any	of	his	 brothers.	The	Suta	he	had	made	into	a	Kshatriya,
would	 win	 him	 the	 war.	 Suyodhana	 called	 a	 guard	 and	 asked	 him	 to	 fetch
Karna.
As	the	messenger	galloped	off	to	fetch	Karna,	Suyodhana	could	hear	the	loud
celebrations	 from	 the	 Pandava	 camp.	 Iravan	 watched	 with	 all-seeing	 eyes,
awaiting	the	arrival	of	the	Suta	who	had	been	summoned	to	pay	his	dues.
*****

61			SURYAPUTRA
	
KARNA	 WAITED	 FOR	 ARJUNA	 TO	 LEAVE	 Bhishma’s	 side.	 It	 was	 almost	 dawn	 but

Arjuna	refused	to	move.	Karna	was	afraid	the	old	warrior	would	die	before	he
could	speak	to	him.	He	had	many	questions	to	ask.	Why	had	Bhishma	always
been	unfair	to	him?	It	was	cruel	to	ask	a	dying	man	such	questions	but	Karna
knew	he	must	if	he	were	to	ever	find	peace.	Just	when	he	had	decided	he	would
have	 to	 confront	 Bhishma	 despite	 Arjuna’s	 presence,	 Yudhishtra	 arrived	 and
took	him	away.
‘Tears	 are	cheap	 once	deceit	 has	done	its	work,’	thought	Karna	as	he	walked
towards	Bhishma	 and	stood	over	him.	No	sound	escaped	Bhishma’s	lips.	Not
even	on	his	deathbed	did	he	let	others	know	he	was	in	pain.
Bhishma	 sensed	 someone’s	 presence.	 “Who	 is	 that?”	 the	 rich	 voice	 was	 a
travesty	of	itself	and	a	lump	formed	in	Karna’s	throat.
“It	is	I	–	Sutaputra.”	Karna	moved	to	kneel	beside	the	fallen	warrior.
“Karna,	my	son,	there	is	something	you	must	know.	You	are	Kunti’s	son,	the
eldest	of	all,”	Bhishma	whispered.
“No,	Sir,	I	am	Radha’s	son.”
“Karna,	don’t	you	recognize	who	you	are?”
“Sir,	I	am	a	Suta	of	low	caste,	who	refused	to	be	intimidated	by	the	accident	of
my	birth.”
“Do	 not	 be	 cruel	 to	 your	 mother,	 Kunti,	 Karna.	 The	 blood	 of	 Lord
Ramachandra	flows	in	your	veins.	You	belong	to	the	Suryavamsha.”
“My	 mother	 is	 Radha	 and	 my	 father	 is	 Athiratha,	 the	 charioteer.	 I	 have	 no

divine	lineage.”
“You	are	punishing	us	all,	Karna.	You	alone	can	stop	this	war.”
“Sir,	have	your	oft-stated	objections	to	me	melted	away	because	you	no	longer
think	I	am	of	low	caste	but	a	Kshatriya?	You	have	never	treated	me	fairly.”
“Do	 not	 carry	 harsh	 thoughts	 about	 a	 dying	 man.	 I	 only	 wished	 to	 keep	 you
away	from	this	madness,	Karna.”
“How	can	I	stay	away	when	Suyodhana	is	in	danger?	I	will	fight	until	my	friend
is	King.”
“The	throne	belongs	to	you,	my	son.”
Karna	 withdrew	 his	 hand	 from	 Bhishma	 and	 stood	 up.	 “What	 wrong	 have	 I
ever	done	to	you?”
“Karna,	 I	 did	 my	 duty	 to	 my	 country.	 When	 the	 Confederate	 demanded	 your
head,	a	war	for	your	sake	was	a	risk	not	worth	taking.	It	was	not	in	the	interests
of	the	kingdom.”
“Would	you	have	given	them	Suyodhana	or	Yudhishtra’s	head	had	they	asked
for	 it?	 Would	 you	 have	 allowed	 any	 of	 the	 Kuru	 Princes	 to	 suffer	 the
humiliation	I	have	suffered	all	my	life?”
“I	have	no	answers	to	your	questions.	Perhaps	things	would	have	been	different
had	I	known	you	were	Kunti’s	son.”
“Even	for	the	great	Bhishma,	it	is	all	about	caste?”
“Karna,	you	are	my	grand-nephew,	like	Suyodhana	or	Yudhishtra.”
“Yet	I	was	treated	like	a	dog.	You	could	have	changed	that.”
“Will	you	not	allow	an	old	man	to	die	in	peace,	Karna?	You	want	me	to	bare
my	 heart	 to	 you?	 Then	 hear	 what	 I	 have	 to	 say.	 I	 was	 afraid	 of	 you,	 and
jealous.”

“The	 great	 Bhishma	 afraid	 and	 jealous	 of	 a	 charioteer ’s	 son?	 Sir,	 you	 mock
me	yet	again.”
“I	knew	that	if	I	allowed	you	to	fight,	there	would	no	Pandavas	left.	You	have
no	equal,	Karna.	I	merely	chose	to	save	my	clan	and	country.	Do	not	fight	in
this	 war.	 Persuade	 Suyodhana	 to	 stop.	 We	 have	 already	 paid	 a	 terrible	 price.
Only	you	can	do	this.	Accept	Krishna’s	offer...”
“And	betray	Suyodhana?	Betray	the	man	who	did	not	think	twice	about	making
a	 Suta	 King	 of	 Anga?	 Betray	 friendship	 for	 a	 worthless	 throne?	 Sir,	 I	 would
rather	die.”
“You	 make	 this	 old	 man	 proud,	 son.	 You	 are	 indeed	 the	 best	 of	 the	 Kurus.	 I
have	no	regrets	but	sometimes	I	wonder	if	I	did	the	right	thing	by	abdicating
the	 throne.	 I	 lived	 for	 this	 country,	 yet	 here	 I	 lie	 on	 my	 deathbed,	 a	 bed	 of
arrows	shot	by	one	of	my	grand-nephews	hiding	behind	a	eunuch.	Here	I	await
the	Lord	of	Death	to	claim	me	once	the	sun	has	crossed	the	sky	into	Sankranti,
while	my	countrymen	butcher	each	other	around	me.”
Karna’s	 hard	 resolve	 broke	 at	 Bhishma’s	 words.	 He	 bent	 down	 beside	 the
prone	figure	and	gently	took	Bhishma’s	hand	between	both	his	own.	“Forgive
my	harsh	words,	Pitamaha.	Bless	this	Suta.”
“Blessed	you	are,	Karna,	by	the	Gods	and	by	the	love	of	the	people.	Remain	so
forever	 –	 unflinching	 in	 adversity,	 selfless	 in	 giving	 and	 brave	 hearted	 in
battle.”
“You	did	not	bless	me	with	victory,	Pitamaha.”
“No	 victory	 will	 be	 greater	 than	 yours,	 my	 son.	 Your	 name	 will	 be
remembered	 till	 the	 sun	 burns	 in	 the	 sky.”	 Bhishma	 raised	 a	 hand	 to	 touch
Karna’s	head	in	benediction.
Choking	back	his	tears,	Karna	touched	the	patriach’s	feet.	How	deeply	he	had
craved	acknowledgement	from	this	man!	Abruptly,	Karna	stood	up.	He	had	his
answers	but	they	only	made	him	feel	sad.	He	had	to	win	this	war	at	any	cost	but
he	vowed	in	his	heart	to	seek	out	Arjuna	and	make	him	beg	for	his	life,	for	the
cowardly	way	in	which	he	had	brought	down	this	great	man.	Karna	walked	to

the	river	and	stepped	into	its	freezing	waters.	The	sun	was	an	orange	ball	in	the
east.	He	began	to	recite	the	Suryagayatri.
“My	son...	“
Karna	cringed,	his	eyes	still	shut	in	prayer.	He	recognized	the	voice.	A	shiver
ran	through	his	body	when	she	touched	his	arm.	Karna	completed	his	mantras
and	dipped	his	head	into	the	rippling	water.	He	prayed	she	would	leave	him	in
peace.	He	yearned	to	stay	in	the	water	and	die	there.	When	he	came	up,	she	was
weeping.	 He	 wanted	 to	 hate	 this	 woman	 but	 he	 felt	 only	 weariness.	 As	 he
stepped	out	of	the	river,	she	stood	in	his	way.
“Devi	Kunti,	allow	this	Suta	to	pass.	Let	not	my	polluted	shadow	fall	on	you.”
“My	son,	will	you	not	forgive	your	mother?”
There	 was	 nothing	 to	 say.	 Karna	 stared	 into	 the	 distance,	 his	 arms	 folded
across	his	powerful	chest.	He	wished	he	were	somewhere	else,	far	away	from
the	woman	before	him.	Finally	he	said,	“Who	am	I	to	forgive	the	Rajamata	of
Hastinapura,	 the	 mother	 of	 the	 noble	 Pandavas?	 I	 am	 but	 a	 water	 weed	 taken
from	the	Ganga	by	a	Suta.”
“You	are	nevertheless	my	son,	Karna,”	Kunti	raised	her	head,	her	eyes	blazing
with	a	hint	of	their	old	fire.
“Where	were	you	when	my	father	pawned	his	only	possessions	to	give	me	an
education?	Where	were	you	when	the	world	laughed	at	my	ambitions?	Where
were	you	when	I	was	being	insulted	about	my	caste	at	every	turn?”
“Son,	you	must	find	it	in	your	heart	to	forgive	me.	Stop	this	war!”
“The	war	will	end	with	the	death	of	your	five	sons.”	Karna’s	skin	flushed.	The
Ganga	glowed	in	the	golden	rays	of	the	sun.
Kunti	 tried	 to	 fall	 at	 his	 feet	 but	 Karna	 pulled	 her	 up.	 Anger	 throbbed	 in	 his
deep	voice.	“Devi,	you	forget	your	exalted	station.”
“Spare	 my	 sons.	 They	 are	 all	 I	 have.	 We	 have	 suffered	 enough.	 Do	 not	 kill
them.”	Kunti	stood	before	him	with	folded	hands.

“This	 is	 a	 war,	 Devi.	 If	 they	 are	 fearful,	 you	 can	 stop	 the	 conflict	 by	 asking
them	to	accept	Suyodhana’s	rightful	claim	to	the	throne.”
“My	sons	are	not	afraid,	Karna;	it	is	a	mother ’s	heart	that	speaks.”
“I	will	kill	them	all,	have	no	doubt	about	that.”
“They	are	your	brothers,	Karna.	Be	generous	and	spare	them.”
“You	have	too	many	expectations	from	the	son	you	never	wanted.”
“Forgive	them,	Karna,	even	if	you	cannot	forgive	your	mother.”
“Forgive	Arjuna	for	all	that	he	has	done?	Tell	your	noble	son	I	am	not	a	great
man	like	Bhishma.	He	is	in	for	a	nasty	surprise	if	he	tries	such	tricks	with	me.”
Kunti	 dried	 her	 tears	 with	 her	pallu	 and	 looked	 up	 at	 Karna	 calmly.	 “I	 know
how	to	stop	this	war	and	still	win.	I	will	announce	to	the	world	that	you	are	my
son.	Your	evil	friend	will	have	to	step	aside	for	you.	Then,	my	son	–	and	not
Gandhari’s	–	will	sit	on	the	throne.”
“So	 this	 is	 all	 a	 part	 of	 your	 political	 game?	 You	 came	 to	 me	 because	 you
wanted	to	win	a	petty	point	over	Maharani	Gandhari?”
“Call	it	what	you	will.	No	one	can	prevent	me,	not	even	you,	my	son.	I	will	do
it.”
Karna	 was	 taken	 aback.	 His	 first	 thought	 was	 for	 his	 friend.	 Suyodhana	 must
never	know.	“If	you	do	so,	I	will	kill	myself	with	my	own	sword.	Suyodhana
will	be	the	rightful	heir	again.	Rest	assured	that	I	will	ensure	you	do	not	win.”
“Karna,	spare	a	thought	for	your	mother.	Spare	my	five	sons.”
“Five	 sons?	 Five	 including	 the	 twins	 of	 your	 co-wife	 Madri,	 but	 not	 six,
including	the	son	you	threw	out	like	trash?”
“Do	not	misunderstand	me,	Karna.	Allow	me	to	explain.	I	do	not	wish	you	to
die.	You	are	my	firstborn,	my	flesh	and	blood.	I	carried	you	for	nine	months
and	bore	you	in	pain...“

“What	about	Draupadi?”	Karna	asked,	his	eyes	cold	and	unforgiving,	his	lips
curved	in	a	derisive	smile.
“She	will	be	your	wife,	too.	Being	the	eldest,	you	will	have	first	right.”
“You	would	do	anything	for	power?	Even	this?”	Karna’s	eyes	mocked	as	he	let
out	a	bitter	laugh.
Kunti	looked	away	from	the	condemnation	written	on	her	son’s	face.	“I	did	not
mean...“
“I	will	spare	the	lives	of	four	of	your	five	sons	–	all	except	Arjuna.	That	is	my
promise	to	you.”
“Oh	no...son,	do	not	harm	your	own	brother.	It	is	a	great	sin.”
“You	will	have	five	sons	after	the	war,	Devi,	not	six.	Either	it	will	be	Arjuna	or
me,	though	I	am	ashamed	to	call	myself	your	son.	Please	leave	before	I	regret
my	decision.”
Kunti	reached	out	her	hand	in	blessing	but	Karna	evaded	her	touch.	He	turned
back	to	say,	“I	must	thank	you	for	throwing	me	away,	else	I	would	never	have
known	what	a	real	mother ’s	love	is.	Accept	the	gratitude	of	this	Radheya,	Devi
Kunti.”	Karna	bowed	and	walked	away	with	steady	steps.
‘I	 thought	 he	 would	 agree	 to	 the	 kingship	 if	 I	 asked,	 if	 I	 admitted	 I	 was	 his
mother.	Oh,	what	have	I	done?’	Kunti	cried	silently.
Krishna	stepped	out	from	behind	a	tree	and	walked	towards	 his	aunt	smiling.
“Every	 man	 has	 his	 destiny	 and	 Karna	 has	 chosen	 his.”	 He	 put	 a	 comforting
arm	around	her	shoulders.
“You	 are	 wrong,	 Krishna.	 I	 am	 not	 being	 manipulative.	 It	 was	 not	 a	 game	 to
me.	He	is	my	son,”	Kunti	declared	coldly,	shaking	off	Krishna’s	arm.
“And	a	great	son,	too!	A	son	you	can	be	proud	of.”	Krishna’s	smile	broadened.
“Nevertheless,	it	was	a	valuable	promise	to	extract	from	him,	Aunt.”
*****

62			GANGADATTA
	
BHISHMA	COULD	HEAR	THE	WAILING	OF	WOMEN.	He	could	smell	the	blood	from	the

battlefield.	 If	 only	 they	 would	 stop	 this	 carnage.	 The	 work	 of	 a	 lifetime	 was
being	destroyed	before	his	eyes.	“Oh	death,	why	you	have	forsaken	me?”	the
grand	old	man	of	Bharata	moaned	in	pain.	He	wished	Karna	had	stayed	for	a
little	 longer.	 He	 wished	 his	 nephews	 would	 come	 and	 stay	 with	 him	 until	 he
took	his	last	breath.	What	had	he	achieved	after	a	life	lived	for	others	–	a	bed
of	arrows	shot	byArjuna	or	the	abuse	Suyodhana	had	bestowed	upon	him?	No
one	needed	him	now.	All	his	efforts	had	been	in	vain.
Shakuni’s	anger	he	could	understand.	He	was	a	Mlecha.	But	how	he	had	loved
him	as	a	boy!	Bhishma	knew	he	had	wronged	Shakuni	–	shattered	his	kingdom,
killed	his	father,	and	made	his	sister	marry	blind	Dhritarashtra.	He	should	have
killed	the	little	boy	when	he	had	found	him	cowering	under	his	sister ’s	bed.	It
had	been	a	grave	mistake,	but	he	knew	he	would	have	taken	the	same	decision
again.	 What	 he	 could	 not	 understand	 was	 Krishna’s	 ruthlessness	 and	 singleminded	determination	to	win	the	war.	True,	he	had	come	with	an	offer	of	truce,
but	why	was	he	meddling	in	the	affairs	of	the	Kurus?
Krishna’s	 obsession	 with	dharma	 as	 he	 defined	 it,	 was	 the	 reason	 for	 all	 this
carnage.	 How	 much	 more	 blood	 would	 flow	 for	 an	 idea	 nobody	 understood
and	each	person	defined	in	his	own	fashion?	Both	sides	passionately	believed
they	had	dharma	on	their	side.	The	tragedy	was	that	no	one	was	going	to	win,
not	 even	 Krishna.	 They	 would	 all	 be	 losers	 in	 this	 war.	 Women	 and	 children
would	be	the	worst	affected.	His	countrymen,	already	affected	by	the	drought,
would	 surely	 lose	 the	 most.	 They	 had	 always	 lost,	 irrespective	 of	 who	 ruled
them.	This	war	had	no	winners.
Bhishma	wanted	to	cry	aloud	to	the	Gods	in	heaven,	‘Have	you	no	mercy	that
you	 afflict	 this	 poor	 earth	 and	 its	 people	 with	 so	 much	 misery?’	 Then,	 in	 a
moment	of	shocking	clarity,	he	saw	that	the	war	would	have	winners,	waiting	in

the	 wings	 like	 vultures,	 for	 the	 warriors	 on	 both	 sides	 to	 die.	 They	 would
inherit	this	holy	land,	make	a	hell	out	of	it	and	call	it	eternal	dharma.	His	 life
had	been	futile.
Bhishma	was	glad	he	would	not	live	to	see	it.	He	wished	death	would	come.	He
was	unwanted,	even	by	the	beasts	feasting	on	the	dead	in	the	temple	of	dharma.
He	 was	 condemned	 to	 wait	 and	 witness	 the	 rise	 of	 Kaliyuga.	 ‘Ma	 Ganga,
forgive	your	son,	Gangadutta,	for	I	have	failed	you,’	the	great	warrior	of	the
Kurus	cried	alone.
Far	away,	in	the	camps	on	either	side,	preparations	went	forward	for	the	next
day’s	battle.	They	had	already	forgotten	Bhishma.	He	was	the	past.
*****

63			END	OF	A	POEM
	
DRONA	 ELABORATED	 ON	 HIS	 BATTLE	 PLAN 	for	the	next	day.	After	Bhishma’s	fall,

despite	his	friend’s	pleas,	Karna	had	declined	the	post	of	Commander-in-Chief
and	 Suyodhana	 had	 been	 compelled	 to	 appoint	 Drona	 as	 Commander	 of	 the
Kaurava	forces.
“Father,	Mother	has	given	me	her	blessing.”
Suyodhana	 turned	 to	 see	 his	 young	 son	 standing	 behind	 him.	 Kumara	 looked
glorious	 in	 his	 battle	 attire.	 Suyodhana	 embraced	 his	 son.	 Was	 he	 doing	 the
right	thing	by	taking	this	untested	boy	into	fighting	such	a	ruthless	war?
“And	 here,	 Kumara’s	 forces	 will	 meet	 Abhimanyu’s	 battalion	 head	 on.	 If
Arjuna’s	son	tries	to	launch	an	attack	on	Kripa’s	akhshouni...”
Drona’s	 voice	 hammered	 in	 Suyodhana’s	 brain.	 He	 wanted	 to	 protest	 but	 his
pride	silenced	him.	He	knew	Lakshmana	Kumara	was	not	Abhimanyu’s	equal
in	battle,	but	how	could	he	say	so	without	hurting	the	boy’s	pride	and	his	own?
Suyodhana’s	mind	was	a	knot	of	worries	as	the	Guru	outlined	his	war	strategy
to	 his	 generals.	 If	 something	 went	 wrong,	 how	 would	 he	 face	 Bhanu?	 How
would	he	face	himself?	But	surely,	nothing	would	go	wrong?
***
“This	 is	 a	 stupid	 war.”	 Shakuni	 sat	 in	 his	 tent,	 his	 hands	 restless.	 His	 eyes
gleamed	in	the	golden	light	of	a	burning	torch.	His	son	sat	close	by,	listening.
A	moth	buzzed	around	the	torch	and	dived	into	the	flame.	An	acrid	smell	filled
the	air.
“This	war	is	the	most	gruesome	fighting	I	have	seen,	Father,”	Uluka	remarked,
shaking	his	head.

“This	 is	 a	 sham	 war.	 It	 is	 neither	 gruesome	 enough,	 nor	 bloody	 enough.
Nothing	 is	 happening.	 These	 Indians	 stick	 to	 some	 ancient	 rules	 which	 make
battles	a	joke.”	Shakuni	rattled	his	dice	together	and	threw	them	on	the	floor.
“What	 we	 need	 is	 raw	 emotion,	 wounds	 that	 will	 never	 heal.	 These	 Indians
must	carry	the	scars	for	centuries.”
“What	do	you	suggest,	Father?”	Uluka	asked.
“Important	 people	 must	 die,	 not	 just	 foot	 soldiers,”	 Shakuni	 said	 softly,
looking	at	his	sons.	“Sleep	well,	for	tomorrow	we	change	everything.”	He	took
the	torch	and	thrust	it	head	first	into	the	sand.	The	flame	broke	into	a	thousand
sparks	 and	 died	 with	 a	 hiss,	 drowning	 them	 in	 darkness.	 Shakuni	 lay	 awake
long	after	his	sons	had	fallen	asleep.
***
“Prince	Kumara,	it	is	your	father...you	must	help	him!	Hurry,	Abhimanyu	has
trapped	him,”	Shakuni	shouted	from	his	chariot.
Kumara	looked	around,	trying	to	locate	his	father ’s	chariot	and	banner.	Where
was	the	white	flag	with	the	coiled	serpents?	Through	the	cloud	of	smoke	and
dust	 he	 finally	 he	 saw	 it	 at	 a	 distance.	 Abhimanyu’s	 forces	 had	 encircled	 his
father ’s	chariot.	Guru	Drona	had	warned	him	of	such	a	move.	How	foolish	he
had	 been	 to	 stop	 for	 the	 wounded	 men	 around	 him!	 His	 father	 would	 die
because	of	him.
“Take	me	there,”	Kumara	screamed	to	his	charioteer,	pointing	to	the	fluttering
white	flag.	He	braced	himself	as	the	chariot	rumbled	on	at	great	speed.	Arrows
rained	around	him	and	a	couple	pierced	his	armour.	“Faster,	faster...”	he	yelled.
The	bow	he	held	was	heavy	and	his	armour	was	suffocating	him.	Kumara	had
no	clear	idea	of	what	he	had	to	do,	only	that	he	had	to	save	his	father	somehow.
When	 he	reached	the	 spot,	 his	father	was	nowhere	to	be	 seen.	Instead,	Uluka,
Shakuni’s	son,	was	fighting	Abhimanyu	from	his	chariot.	Uluka’s	had	a	similar
flag,	with	one	coiled	serpent,	but	it	also	had	the	small	emblem	of	Gandhara	in
its	left	corner.
“Hey,	you	coward!	Why	are	you	running	away?”	Abhimanyu	yelled	at	the	fast

vanishing	Uluka.
Kumara	realized	he	had	made	a	grave	error	and	placed	himself	in	harm’s	way.
“Prince,	see	who	we	have	here,”	a	soldier	said,	jumping	into	Kumara’s	chariot.
Abhimanyu	turned	and	his	eyes	grew	wide	with	surprise.	“What	are	you	doing
here,	Kumara?”	he	asked	as	he	threw	down	his	bow	and	unsheathed	his	sword.
Another	 soldier	 jumped	 into	 Kumara’s	 chariot.	 With	 a	 force	 he	 had	 never
imagined	 he	 possessed,	 Kumara	 kicked	 the	 first	 soldier.	 The	 second	 one
charged	 at	 him	 but	 Kumara	 cut	 him	 down	 with	 his	 sword.	 Clutching	 his
lacerated	stomach,	the	man	collapsed	onto	the	chariot	floor.	Kumara	looked	at
the	 river	 of	 blood	 in	 a	 daze.	 He	 threw	 down	 his	 sword,	 saying	 in	 horror,	 “I
have	killed	a	man!”
Kumara’s	charioteer	tried	to	leap	down	and	escape	but	Abhimanyu	cut	off	his
head	with	a	slash	of	his	sword.	Then	he	advanced	towards	his	childhood	friend
and	grabbed	Kumara	by	the	hair.
“Abhimanyu,	are	you	going	to	kill	me?”	Kumara	asked	softly,
“This	is	war,	my	friend.	I	am	sorry,	Kumara.	The	world	will	miss	a	poet.”	With
one	clean	sweep	of	his	sword,	Abhimanyu	severed	Kumara’s	head.	It	dropped
to	the	ground	and	rolled	away.	Arjuna’s	son	thrust	his	sword	into	the	head	and
raised	 it	 for	 the	 world	 to	 see.	 “Behold!	 I	 have	 killed	 Duryodhana’s	 son	 and
heir!”
All	 around	 him,	 conches	 sounded	 and	 drums	 boomed	 to	 mark	 his	 feat.	 His
father	 and	 uncles	 arrived	 to	 congratulate	 him.	 He	 had	 made	 them	 proud.
Abhimanyu	stood	in	the	middle	of	the	battlefield	with	Kumara’s	head	raised	on
the	tip	of	his	sword.	He	felt	a	twinge	of	pity	for	the	friend	he	had	killed,	but	the
exhilarating	 victory	 and	 pride	 in	 his	 father ’s	 eyes	 soon	 swept	 away	 such
feelings.
He	was	about	to	walk	away	when	he	saw	something	strange.	What	was	wrong
with	Iravan’s	severed	head?	He	blinked.	The	head	had	somehow	changed	into
Kumara’s,	 then	 some	 Rakshasa’s,	 before	 changing	 back	 to	 Iravan.	 The	 head
kept	 changing	 its	 features.	 Abhimanyu’s	 throat	 went	 dry.	 He	 stared	 in	 utter

horror	and	disbelief.	He	was	looking	at	his	own	severed	head	on	the	spike.
***
“I	want	him	dead,”	Bhanumati	said	fiercely,	her	eyes	and	lips	red	and	swollen
from	crying.
Suyodhana	did	not	raise	his	head.	He	yearned	for	the	release	of	tears	but	they
refused	to	come.
“You	 killed	 him!	 You	 told	 me	 you	 would	 protect	 him;	 that	 no	 harm	 would
befall	 him.	 I	 want	 to	 see	 your	 Subhadra	 weep	 like	 me.	 Go!	 Get	 me
Abhimanyu’s	head!	Give	me	your	word	as	a	man	that	you	will	kill	him.”
“Bhanu,	it	is	a	war...	your	son	died	like	a	warrior.”
“I	don’t	want	words,	I	want	Abhimanyu’s	head.	Kill	him	mercilessly,	just	as	he
killed	my	son.”
“Devi	 Bhanumati,	 it	 was	 I,	 as	 Commander,	 who	 failed	 to	 protect	 your	 son.”
Drona	came	forward	with	head	bowed.
“Guru,	 do	 not	 protect	 my	 husband.	 It	 was	 not	 your	 fault	 but	 his.	 He	 failed	 to
protect	his	only	son.	But	we	are	nothing	to	him.	How	does	it	matter	that	our	son
is	 dead?	 My	 Kumara	 never	 wanted	 to	 fight	 anyone,	 never	 wanted	 to	 be	 a
warrior.	He	was	a	gentle	soul.	But	he	went	to	make	his	father	proud.	Now	he	is
dead.	My	son	did	not	want	the	throne.	For	whose	sake	does	my	husband	fight
but	his	own?
“Abhimanyu	will	not	see	tomorrow’s	sunset,	Devi.	This	is	Drona’s	word.	They
have	broken	 yet	another	 rule	of	war	–	not	to	 attack	a	disarmed	man.	We	will
not	rest	until	we	have	vanquished	the	amoral	Pandavas.”
“What	good	will	that	do	my	son,	 Guru?	My	Kumara	 is	never	going	to	come
back.”
“His	sacrifice	will	not	have	been	in	vain.	Place	your	trust	in	me.”
“Guru,	you	are	too	kind,	but	why	does	my	husband	remain	silent?”

“Bhanu,	we	must	go	after	Arjuna	and	Yudhishtra	first.”
“Oh,	so	it	pains	you	to	think	of	killing	Subhadra’s	son?	I	do	not	care	whether
you	 or	 Yudhishtra	 wins,	 but	 I	 want	 the	 man	 who	 killed	 my	 son	 dead.”
Bhanumati	turned	away,	sobbing.
Suyodhana	caught	her	by	her	wrist	and	drew	her	to	him.	“Bhanu,	Abhimanyu
will	not	see	the	end	of	tomorrow.”
“You	have	turned	me	into	a	monster,	Suyodhana.	Poor	Subhadra.	I	feel	pity	for
her.	I	feel	pity	for	all	the	mothers	who	will	lose	their	sons	in	this	horrible	war.”
Bhanu	wept	on	his	chest.
Suyodhana	ran	his	fingers	through	her	dishevelled	hair.	“Abhimanyu	will	die
tomorrow.	Never	fear,	our	son	will	be	avenged,”	he	whispered	in	her	ear.
Bhanumati’s	tears	fell	like	winter	rain.
***

64 			WHEEL	OF	DEATH
	
HIS	 ARMY	 STRETCHED	 TO	 THE	 HORIZON.	Suyodhana	looked	at	the	elephant	corps,

alternating	 with	 the	 cavalry,	 infantry	 and	 chariots,	 moving	 in	 concentric
circles.	 Mounted	 archers,	 in	 perfect	 synchronization,	 like	 the	 spokes	 of	 a
chariot	wheel,	darted	off	to	attack	enemy	battalions.	He	had	only	heard	of	the
famed	chakravyuha	formation.	It	was	as	beautiful	and	sinister	as	a	King	Cobra
uncoiling.	Drona,	as	Commander-in-Chief,	had	made	all	the	difference	to	the
war.	It	was	no	longer	fought	by	a	patriarch	to	teach	his	successors	the	lessons
of	war,	but	by	a	ruthless	strategist	who	did	not	care	about	expending	lives.	The
war	had	taken	a	deadly	turn.
Karna’s	chariot	went	past	Suyodhana	like	lightning,	tilted	at	a	crazy	angle	on
its	right	wheels.	Karna	yelled	a	warning	but	his	charioteer	merely	smiled	and
told	him	to	watch	his	target.	It	would	have	been	unthinkable	for	any	ordinary
charioteer	to	talk	back	to	the	King	of	Anga,	but	Shalya	was	no	ordinary	man.
He	was	King	of	Madra	and	the	best	charioteer	in	all	of	Bharatavarsha.	He	had
volunteered	to	drive	Karna,	and	Suyodhana	had	overruled	Drona	to	allow	it.	It
had	not	helped	that	Shalya	was	Madri’s	brother	and	hence	the	Pandava	twins’
uncle.	 Shalya	 considered	 himself	 a	 better	 charioteer	 than	 even	 Krishna.
Suyodhana	smiled	at	Shalya’s	skill	and	the	irony	of	a	Kshatriya	charioteer	for
a	Suta.
“Brace	 and	 thrust!”	 Drona’s	 voice	 boomed	 and	 the	 circle	 shifted	 into	 an	 egg
shape	in	a	trice.
No	man	in	his	right	senses	dared	to	attack	a	full-blown	chakravyuha	formation.
The	 best	 strategy	 for	 the	 opposing	 Commander	 was	 to	 wait	 for	 the	 storm	 to
pass.	 Like	 typhoons,	chakravyuhas	lost	energy	after	the	initial	thrust.	It	was	a
difficult	task	to	keep	such	a	huge	formation	perfectly	synchronized.	If	someone
managed	to	break	in,	all	hell	could	break	loose.	The	change	of	shape	now	was
a	 sign	 that	 someone	 was	 trying	 to	 break	 in.	 Only	 a	 reckless	 or	 foolish

Commander	would	order	a	frontal	attack	on	the	chakravyuha.	Arjuna	was	no
fool,	neither	was	he	reckless,	so	what	was	happening?
“Disperse.”	 Drona’s	 voice	 was	 calm	 but	 it	 sent	 shivers	 through	 the	 Kaurava
ranks.	Disperse?	Break	the	chakravyuha?	Was	the	Guru	in	his	right	mind?
“Guru	 Drona!”	 Suyodhana	 shouted	 but	 the	 Guru’s	 face	 was	 set	 in	 granite.
Suyodhana	turned	and	saw	Abhimanyu’s	chariot	rushing	towards	them	at	great
speed.	An	arrow	came	flying	towards	Suyodhana.	He	deflected	it	with	his	mace.
The	chakravyuha	had	been	breached!	Behind	Abhimanyu,	the	Pandava	cavalry
charged	at	full	gallop,	sending	the	chakravyuha	into	disarray.
On	Suyodhana’s	left,	Karna’s	chariot	came	rushing	to	a	halt	in	a	cloud	of	dust.
A	 finger	 length	 more	 and	 it	 would	 have	 crashed	 onto	 his.	 Shalya	 grinned.
Karna’s	 face	 was	 creased	 with	 worry.	 On	 Suyodhana’s	 right,	 Aswathama’s
chariot	 raced	 up.	 Karna	 jumped	 into	 Suyodhana’s	 chariot	 and	 shot	 an	 arrow
with	 a	 single,	 fluid	 movement.	 It	 lodged	 in	 Abhimanyu’s	 shoulder,	 drawing
blood,	but	the	young	man	did	not	bother	to	pull	it	out.	His	murderous	stare	was
fixed	 on	 Suyodhana’s	 face	 and	 his	 arrow	 whistled	 past	 the	 Crown	 Prince’s
head.	Karna’s	next	arrow	caught	Abhimanyu’s	other	shoulder	but	Arjuna’s	son
did	not	even	flinch.	He	aimed	at	Suyodhana’s	throat.
“Formation!”	Drona’s	unruffled	voice	rose	above	the	din	and	the	chakravyuha
formation	closed.	What	was	Drona	doing?	“Cut	and	close!”
One	 of	 the	 spokes	 of	 the	 formation	 detached	 itself	 and	 wound	 around	 the
Pandava	 attacking	 cavalry	 and	 cut	 off	 Abhimanyu	 from	 his	 troops.	 A	 perfect
trap!	Abhimanyu	had	not	seen	the	danger,	his	eyes	fixed	on	Suyodhana.	With	a
loud	crack,	the	wheels	of	Abhimanyu’s	chariot	broke	loose	and	fell,	throwing
him	 to	 the	 ground.	 Abhimanyu	 looked	 stunned.	 The	 force	 of	 the	 fall	 had
broken	his	bow	in	two.	The	wheel	pin	lay	on	the	ground	with	Drona’s	arrow
through	it.
“He	is	all	yours,	Prince,”	Drona	said	in	a	flat	voice	to	Suyodhana.
Abhimanyu	 leapt	 up,	 drew	 his	 sword	 and	 stood	 in	 combat	 position.	 His	 face
betrayed	not	a	flicker	of	emotion	as	he	stood	calmly,	his	eyes	coldly	sweeping
the	 Kaurava	ranks.	He	stood	alone	in	the	 Kaurava	chakravyuha,	 there	was	no

going	 back.	 Suyodhana	 jumped	 from	 his	 chariot	 and	 walked	 towards	 him.
Karna,	Aswathama	and	Jayadratha	followed,	swords	drawn.	Suyodhana	could
not	 but	 admire	 the	 raw	 courage	 the	 young	 man	 showed.	 How	 he	 wished
Abhimanyu	 had	 been	 his	 son.	 The	 thought	 of	 his	 own	 dead	 son	 snapped
Suyodhana	back	to	reality.	Abhimanyu	deserved	no	mercy.
“Halt	 if	 you	 value	 your	 life,”Abhimanyu	 said,	 his	 voice	 clear	 and	 unafraid.
“Four	against	one	-	is	this	dharma?”
Suyodhana’s	laughter	held	a	bitter	ring.	“Righteousness	died	when	your	father
hid	 behind	 a	 eunuch	 and	 shot	 Pitamaha.	 Dharma	 was	 buried	 when	 you
murdered	an	unarmed	Kumara.	He	was	your	friend,	Abhimanyu.	You	betrayed
him	in	life	and	in	death.”
“Uncle	Suyodhana,	stop	this	whining	and	fight	like	a	man!”
Jayadratha	rushed	at	Abhimanyu,	but	the	youngster	moved	away	from	the	arc
of	Jayadratha’s	sword	and	pushed	him	away	with	his	shield.	Jayadratha	lost	his
balance	 and	 fell.	 Abhimanyu	 laughed.	 Suyodhana	 felt	 pity	 stir	 in	 his	 heart	 as
Aswathama	 swung	 his	 sword.	 Abhimanyu	 tried	 to	 dodge	 it	 but	 the	 wily
Brahmin	warrior	had	anticipated	it.	At	the	last	moment,	he	changed	his	swing
to	a	thrust,	cutting	deeply	into	Abhimanyu’s	shoulder.	Blood	eagerly	followed
his	blade.
Abhimanyu	 grunted	 in	 pain.	 “Cowards!	 Fighting	 four	 to	 one.	 Shameless
beasts!”	he	yelled,	swinging	his	sword	at	Karna.
Karna	 blocked	 the	 blow	 with	 his	 shield	 and	 swung	 his	 sword	 at	 Abhimanyu.
The	youngster	blocked	it	with	his	own	sword	and	angry	sparks	flew	over	them.
In	 a	 moment,	 the	 sword	 had	 been	 dislodged	 from	 Karna’s	 hand.	 Abhimanyu
attacked	 like	 a	 whirlwind	 and	 Karna	 struggled	 to	 block	 his	 thrusts	 and	 blows
with	his	shield.
It	 was	 all	 happening	 very	 quickly.	 Jayadratha	 had	 managed	 to	 walk	 away,	 his
face	contorted	with	rage	and	shame.	Beaten	by	a	mere	boy!	The	King	of	Sindh
gritted	 his	 teeth	 and	 tried	 to	 rush	 towards	 Abhimanyu,	 but	 Suyodhana
restrained	 him.	 The	 boy	 was	 for	 Karna.	 The	 next	 moment,	 Suyodhana	 saw
something	 wriggling	 in	 Karna’s	 hand.	 The	 urumi,	 the	 rope-like	 sword	 of	 the

South,	which	Karna	wore	like	a	belt,	shimmered	in	the	sun.	It	rose	high	into	the
sky	and	then	coiled	itself	around	Abhimanyu’s	sword.	The	boy	looked	stunned
as	Karna	prised	the	weapon	from	his	hand.	Before	he	knew	it,	he	had	lost	his
shield	as	well.
Abhimanyu	bent	and	picked	up	the	broken	chariot	wheel,	blood	flowing	from
the	 wound	 in	 his	 shoulder.	 Karna	 and	 Aswathama	 walked	 towards	 him,	 but
Abhimanyu’s	gaze	was	fixed	on	Suyodhana.	With	a	roar,	he	threw	the	chariot
wheel	at	him.	Suyodhana	swung	his	mace	and	hit	the	flying	wheel,	smashing	it
to	pieces.
“Hurry,”	Drona’s	voice	urged.	“Arjuna	is	trying	to	break	in.”
“Kill	 me	 if	 you	 dare,	 you	 cowards,”	 Abhimanyu	 said,	 his	 chest	 heaving	 with
exertion	and	pain.
“Arjuna	has	arrived.	It	is	now	or	never,”	Drona	said	from	his	chariot.
Karna	and	Aswathama	moved	another	step	closer	and	Abhimanyu	took	a	step
backwards.	 Karna	 turned	 to	 Suyodhana,	 a	 silent	 question	 hung	 in	 the	 air
between	them.	It	seemed	so	wrong,	so	ignoble	to	hack	a	boy	to	death	like	this.
Subhadra’s	 pleading	 face	 came	 to	 Suyodhana’s	 mind.	 His	 eyes	 locked	 on	 the
pearl	necklace	Abhimanyu	always	wore.	He	remembered	gifting	it	to	him	when
he	 had	 first	 held	 the	 infant	 Abhimanyu	 in	 his	 arms.	 This	 could	 have	 been	 his
Kumara.	‘No!	He	killed	my	son	without	mercy.	He	put	his	head	on	a	pole	for
everyone	to	jeer	at...	‘
“Finish	him!”	Suyodhana	ordered.
Jayadratha,	 who	 had	 moved	 behind	 Abhimanyu,	 acted	 in	 a	 flash.	 He	 grabbed
Abhimanyu’s	hair	and	slit	his	throat	with	his	sword.
“No!”	 Arjuna’s	 yell	 made	 them	 all	 look	 up.	 He	 and	 Krishna	 had	 managed	 to
break	 the	 chakravyuha	 but	 he	 was	 too	 late.	 Jumping	 from	 his	 chariot	 and
throwing	down	his	bow,	Arjuna	rushed	to	his	son’s	lifeless	body.	“Guru,	why
did	you	do	this?”	he	asked,	his	eyes	full	of	tears.
Drona	looked	at	Arjuna,	pity	in	his	heart,	but	he	had	given	Bhanumati	his	word.
The	war	was	far	from	over.

Suyodhana	 knew	 what	 it	 felt	 like	 to	 lose	 a	 son.	 “You	 deserve	 nothing	 better,
Arjuna.	Your	son	killed	mine	without	giving	him	a	chance	to	defend	himself.”
Karna,	Aswathama	and	Jayadratha	moved	to	stand	beside	Suyodhana.
“You	evil	men,	you	killed	my	son!	Four	against	one.	Cowards!”	Arjuna	spat	on
the	ground	in	contempt.	“You	call	yourself	warriors?”
Jayadratha	laughed	and	said	Abhimanyu	had	got	what	he	deserved.
Arjuna	 gently	 put	 down	 his	 son’s	 lifeless	 body.	 “Jayadratha,	 it	 was	 a	 terrible
mistake	to	spare	your	life.	You	are	worthless	and	I	should	have	killed	you	the
day	you	sneaked	into	Draupadi’s	tent.	But	you	will	not	see	tomorrow’s	sunset.
If	you	do,	I	will	jump	into	a	pyre	and	burn	myself	in	its	flames.	This	is	my	oath
before	God.”
Drums	 rolled	 and	 horns	 blared,	 making	 the	 vow	 known	 to	 the	 world.
Jayadratha	turned	pale.	He	could	almost	see	the	finger	of	death	pointing	at	him.
“Arjuna,	bent	on	suicide	instead	of	facing	a	Suta?”	Karna	mocked.
Without	a	word	Arjuna	picked	up	the	body	of	his	son	and	walked	to	his	chariot.
Suyodhana	felt	his	throat	choke	with	pain.	Of	course	Arjuna	would	tell	her	how
they	 had	 killed	 her	 son.	 ‘Subhadra,	 what	 have	 I	 done	 to	 your	 son?	 Oh	 God,
what	have	I	done?	No!	There	are	no	wrongs	in	this	bloody	war.’	He	had	kept
his	word	to	his	wife	by	killing	Subhadra’s	son.	With	it,	everything	to	do	with
Subhadra	had	died	a	violent	death.	He	could	now	face	Bhanu	with	a	clean	heart,
he	told	himself,	trying	to	pacify	his	tortured	mind.
The	 Guru	 blew	 his	 conch,	 signalling	 the	 end	 of	 battle	 for	 the	 day.	 Instead	 of
elation,	the	weariness	of	war	blanketed	Suyodhana’s	mind	as	they	walked	back
to	their	camp	in	silence.	He	coud	not	bring	himself	to	join	in	the	celebrations
of	his	excited	men.	Subhadra’s	face	refused	to	leave	his	troubled	mind.	‘I	have
become	Duryodhana,	but	did	I	have	any	choice?’	he	asked	himself.
Silence	 shrouded	 the	 Pandava	 camp.	 Tomorrow	 it	 would	 be	 their	 turn	 to
avenge	blood	with	blood.
*****

65			WARRIOR’S	HONOUR
	
UTHAYAN	 WAS	 ECSTATIC.	 Finally	 Guru	 Dhaumya	 had	 requested	 the	 help	 of	 the

Southern	 Confederate.	 They	 were	 no	 longer	 part	 players	 who	 scoured	 the
countryside	for	food	and	supplies	for	the	Pandava	army.	It	was	demeaning	to
act	like	bandits	and	terrorize	poor	villagers.	Yet	he	had	done	his	duty	well.	It
was	 not	 going	 to	 be	 an	 easy	 task	 to	 break	 the	 defences	 set	 by	 Drona	 and	 kill
Jayadratha.	No	wonder	Arjuna	was	considered	a	hero.	In	comparison,	his	life
looked	dull	and	boring.	Uthayan	had	to	do	something	he	could	be	proud	of.
“In	the	name	of	Lord	Vishnu,	I	vow	to	kill	Karna	tomorrow.	If	the	Suta	lives	to
see	tomorrow’s	sunset,	I,	Uthayan	Cheralathan	will	jump	into	a	pyre	and	give
up	 my	 worthless	 life.”	 Uthayan	 felt	 elated	 as	 loud	 cheering	 rose	 around	 him.
Drummers	 beat	 a	 frenzied	 rhythm	 and	 bards	 blared	 their	 horns.	 His	 vassal
Kings	bowed	before	his	courage.	Priests	applied	sandal	paste	on	his	forehead
and	 garlanded	 him	 with	 red	 flowers.	 The	 bards	 began	 singing	 paeans	 about
him	and	his	illustrious	dynasty.	A	vow	of	such	magnitude	could	only	be	heard
with	awe	and	respect.
***
Suyodhana	knew	Jayadratha’s	safety	was	more	chimeric	than	real.	In	his	mind
he	clearly	understood	Arjuna’s	anguish	and	rage	over	Abhimanyu’s	death.	He
had	felt	the	same	emotions	seething	like	a	cauldron	in	his	soul	when	Kumara
had	been	killed.
A	strange	mist	had	rolled	in	from	the	rushes	of	the	Ganga.	Visibility	was	down
to	a	few	feet.	“Shakatavyuha!”	Drona’s	command	brought	Suyodhana	back	to
the	 gruesome	 battlefield.	 All	 around	 him	 cavalry	 and	 elephants	 were
assembling	 in	 a	 box	 cart	 formation.	 Where	 was	 Arjuna’s	 chariot?	 By
promising	 to	 kill	 Jayadratha	 before	 sunset,	 surely	 Arjuna	 had	 overreached
himself?	 There	 was	 no	 way	 Arjuna	 could	 pierce	 the	 shakatavyuha.	 It	 was	 a

formation	designed	for	defence,	with	a	hundred	circles	of	cavalry,	chariots	and
elephants.	 Jayadratha	 stood	 beside	 Suyodhana	 in	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 formation,
pale	 with	 fear	 and	 tension.	 ‘Hold	 on,	 friend.	 In	 a	 short	 while,	 we	 will	 watch
Arjuna	 commit	 suicide,’	 Suyodhana	 said	 silently	 to	 himself.	 There	 was	 yet
another	 challenger	 who	 had	 made	 a	 rash	 promise	 to	 immolate	 himself.	 But
Karna	could	take	care	of	himself.	Uthayan	was	no	match	for	him.
***
Screams,	challenges,	dust,	blood,	arrows	flying	thick	and	fast	–	it	was	a	scene
from	hell.	At	any	moment	now,	Drona	would	sound	his	conch	to	mark	the	end
of	the	battle	for	the	day.	Despite	ferocious	fighting,	the	Southern	Confederate
armies	had	not	been	able	to	penetrate	the	shakatavyuha.	The	casualties	on	both
sides	 were	 heavy	 but	 the	 Southern	 forces	 continued	 to	 come	 on,	 like	 moths
attracted	to	a	flame,	caring	nothing	about	certain	death.	But	Karna	continued	to
hold	them	off.	The	time	for	celebration	was	fast	approaching.
A	 bloodcurdling	 scream	 made	 Suyodhana	 turn,	 his	 heart	 skipping	 a	 beat.
Karna!	 Uthayan	 was	 in	 Karna’s	 chariot,	 but	 where	 was	 Karna?	 He	 saw	 the
Asura	 King’s	 sword	 lifted	 high,	 ready	 to	 strike.	 How	 had	 the	 Confederate
Commander	pierced	the	formidable	box-cart	formation?
“Quick!	Take	me	to	Karna,”	Suyodhana	prodded	his	charioteer.
The	sun	had	set	and	his	soldiers	were	already	celebrating	their	victory.	Arjuna
had	 lost.	 But	 Suyodhana	 felt	 numb.	 Was	 Karna	 alive?	 What	 meaning	 had
victory	without	Karna?	Crores	of	armoured	elephants	blocked	his	path,	hiding
Karna’s	 chariot	 from	 his	 sight.	 He	 could	 hear	 Drona’s	 victory	 call	 and	 his
troops	taunting	Arjuna.
“Go	around	the	elephants,”	Suyodhana	urged	his	charioteer.	Why	was	the	fool
taking	so	much	time?
When	the	last	of	the	elephants	had	moved,	he	saw	Karna	standing	in	his	chariot.
What	had	happened	to	Uthayan?
“Move!	The	King	is	wounded.	Let	him	pass,”	Karna	shouted	to	his	troops.
A	wounded	man	staggered	through	the	ranks,	a	deep	gash	in	his	back	oozing

blood	onto	his	mahogany	skin.	Karna’s	soldiers	parted	for	Uthayan	to	walk	to
safety.	 The	 Southern	 Confederate	 leader	 had	 lost	 his	 final	 war.	 He	 dragged
himself	to	his	camp.
Suyodhana	 reached	 Karna’s	 chariot.	 How	 had	 Uthayan	 hurt	 his	 back?	 Surely
Karna	would	never	do	such	a	dishonourable	thing,	even	in	self-defence?
“No	Suyodhana,	banish	the	thought,”	Karna	said,	guessing	the	question	in	his
friend’s	eyes.	“It	was	a	fair	fight.	Unfortunately,	he	turned	his	back	at	the	last
moment,	 when	 the	 blade	 was	 already	 descending.	 It	 was	 not	 fitting.	 He	 was	 a
brave	adversary.”
“The	wound	is	not	deep	enough	to	kill	him.	Tomorrow,	I	am	sure	you	will	give
him	a	death	befitting	the	brave	warrior	he	is.”
“No,	he	is	already	dead.	See	what	is	happening.”
Uthayan	had	arrived	in	his	own	ranks.	A	Confederate	soldier	spat	on	his	face.
Like	a	ritual,	the	other	soldiers	spat	on	their	King’s	face,	calling	him	a	coward.
The	man	who	had	once	been	their	Supreme	Overlord,	stood	with	his	head	hung
in	shame,	covered	in	spittle.
“What	is	this,	Karna?”
“He	has	betrayed	the	pride	of	their	race	by	turning	his	back	during	a	fight.	The
wound	on	his	back	has	branded	him	a	coward.	His	body	may	still	be	alive	but
his	soul	is	dead.”
“Karna,	is	this	how	they	treat	a	leader	who	was	courageous	enough	to	penetrate
the	shakatavyuha	and	take	you	by	surprise?”
“It	is	the	custom	in	their	part	of	the	country.”
“What	a	war!”
“It	is	terrible,	but	we	won	today,	Suyodhana.	I	only	regret	I	could	not	make	this
Arjuna’s	last	day	on	earth.”
“Such	a	rash	promise!”	said	his	friend,	a	rare	smile	on	his	lined	face.

“Why	is	the	camp	suddenly	so	silent?”
“Where...is	 Jayadratha?”	 A	 knot	 formed	 in	 Suyodhana’s	 gut.	 “Turn	 back	 the
chariot.	Hurry!”	he	urged	his	charioteer.
Why	 were	 his	 men	 standing	 with	 their	 heads	 hanging?	 What	 had	 happened?
Some	 soldiers	 were	 lighting	 torches.	 What	 was	 that	 crowd	 doing	 in	 the
middle?	 And	 why	 was	 the	 enemy	 camp	 cheering?	 Suyodhana	 jumped	 down
from	 his	 chariot	 before	 it	 could	 come	 to	 a	 halt	 and	 rushed	 into	 the	 crowd.
“Where	is	Jayadratha?	What	has	happened?”	he	yelled.
One	of	the	men	pointed	to	the	ground.	He	knew	what	he	would	see.	No,	it	could
not	be.	It	was	already	dark.	The	sun	had	set.	Battle	had	ceased.	Surely	Arjuna
would	 never	 do	 it.	 He	 was	 not	 so	 dishonourable.	 But	 Jayadratha’s	 headless
body	lay	on	the	ground,	Arjuna’s	arrow	embedded	in	his	chest.	‘Oh,	Sushala!
What	can	your	brother	say	to	you?’
“I	 taught	 him	 better.	 Today	 I	 feel	 ashamed	 to	 say	 Arjuna	 was	 my	 disciple.”
Drona’s	voice	was	calm	 but	he	could	not	hide	the	 pain	 he	 felt.	“Suyodhana,	I
could	not	save	Jayadratha.”
“Guru,	it	was	not	your	fault.	They	cheated	to	win,	just	as	they	did	with	Pitamaha
Bhishma,”	Karna	said.
Drona	 put	 his	 hands	 on	 Suyodhana’s	 shoulders.	 “Do	 you	 know	 what	 Krishna
said	 when	 I	 confronted	 him?	 That	 there	 had	 been	 no	 sunset,	 only	 a	 solar
eclipse,	which	he	had	created	with	his	powers	of	illusion.	They	had	the	nerve	to
argue	that	they	killed	Jayadratha	a	fraction	of	a	moment	before	the	sun	set.”
“A	convenient	excuse	for	Arjuna	to	break	the	rules	of	war,”	Aswathama	hissed.
“Carry	 Jayadratha’s	 body	 to	 be	 cremated	 with	 full	 honours	 due	 to	 a	 King.
Where	is	his	head?”
“While	the	Guru	was	arguing	with	Arjuna,	Dhristadyumna	carried	it	away	like
a	trophy.”
“This	war	sickens	me,”	Suyodhana	turned	away,	his	heart	heavy.

“No,	Suyodhana.	This	is	not	the	time	for	despondency.	They	will	do	anything
for	 victory	 and	 it	 is	 our	dharma	 to	 vanquish	 such	 unscrupulous	 devils,”	 said
Karna,	his	eyes	fixed	on	his	friend’s	face.
Drona	 blew	 his	 conch	 to	 assemble	 the	 troops.	 Then	 he	 announced,	 “Thrice
have	they	broken	the	ancient	rules	of	war.	They	use	blatant	lies	to	justify	their
shameless	acts.	Our	enemy	will	stoop	to	any	level.	For	our	country,	our	future,
for	humanity	and	dharma,	we	must	win.	From	now	on	we	will	not	end	the	battle
at	sunset.	The	war	will	end	when	we	kill	the	last	Pandava.	Garudvyuha!”
The	 soldiers	 rushed	 to	 take	 their	 positions	 in	 the	 eagle-shaped	 formation.	 At
Drona’s	command,	they	rushed	with	terrifying	speed	and	swooped	down	on	the
Pandavas.	 Iravan’s	 dead	 eyes	 watched	 the	 dreadful	 slaughter	 that	 followed
without	emotion,	indifferent	and	unmoving	like	a	stithapranja.
***
In	 another	 part	 of	 Kurukshetra,	 a	 strange	 ritual	 was	 unfolding.	 Uthayan	 had
failed	to	kill	Karna	by	sunset.	He	had	turned	his	back	when	it	had	mattered	the
most.	His	life	was	not	worth	living	anymore.	He	had	no	philosopher-friend	to
explain	the	mysteries	of	dharma	and	dissuade	him	from	keeping	his	word.	One
last	 time	 he	 asked	 his	 ancestors’	 pardon	 for	 being	 a	 coward.	 The	 bards
lamented	his	shame,	a	shame	shared	by	all	his	men,	which	they	would	carry	for
generations.	 Dressed	 in	 a	 loincloth,	 his	 face	 blackened	 with	 ash,	 Uthayan
entered	 his	 funeral	 pyre.	 In	 his	 last	 moments,	 Uthayan	 prayed	 history	 would
judge	him	kindly.
But	he	need	not	have	bothered.	His	history	and	that	of	his	people	did	not	matter
to	Bharatavarsha.	They	belonged	to	the	wrong	side	of	the	Vindhya	mountains.
*****

66			HALF	DHARMA
	
SUYODHANA	SAT	WITH	HIS	SISTER,	SUSHALA.	She	had	not	spoken	a	word	nor	shed	a

tear	 since	 her	 husband’s	 headless	 body	 had	 been	 carried	 into	 the	 palace.
Dhristadyumna	 had	 run	 off	 with	 Jayadratha’s	 head	 and	 deposited	 it	 in
Jayadratha’s	father ’s	lap.	The	erstwhile	King	of	Sindh	had	become	a	mendicant
upon	relinquishing	his	kingdom	to	his	son.	He	had	been	deep	in	meditation	in
the	jungle	near	Kurukshetra	when	his	son’s	severed	head	had	been	flung	into
his	lap.	This	act	of	savage	cruelty	caused	life	to	flee	the	sage’s	frail	body.	The
Pandavas	justified	it	by	saying	that	Jayadratha	himself	had	claimed	there	would
be	total	destruction	of	the	world,	should	his	head	ever	be	allowed	to	touch	the
ground	after	he	died.
Gandhari	 arrived	 with	 Dhritarashtra	 to	 be	 with	 their	 daughter	 and	 share	 her
grief.	But	Suyodhana	did	not	have	the	courage	to	look	at	his	mother.	He	tried	to
speak	to	his	grim-faced	father,	to	condole	him	on	the	loss	of	his	many	sons	in
the	 war,	 but	 Dhritarashtra	 cut	 him	 off	 saying	 such	 talk	 did	 not	 become	 a
Kshatriya.	His	mother	refused	to	listen.	Suyodhana	felt	bitter.	His	parents	had
always	instilled	in	him	the	importance	for	a	Kshatriya	to	be	prepared	for	war,
yet	 when	 events	 turned	 ugly,	 they	 turned	 away	 from	 him.	 Sons,	 brothers,
fathers,	 thousands	 of	 men	 –	 the	 losses	 kept	 mounting.	 There	 had	 been	 a	 time
when	 even	 the	 death	 of	 a	 sparrow	 would	 affect	 him.	 But	 life	 had	 numbed	 his
heart	and	mind.	Death	held	no	meaning	anymore.
Suratha	sat	shivering	behind	his	mother.	Arjuna	had	killed	his	father.	He	would
be	expected	to	avenge	his	father ’s	death	one	day.	His	mother	had	said	so.	He	sat
looking	at	his	father ’s	headless	body	until	it	was	time	to	perform	the	final	rites.
As	 he	 lit	 his	 father ’s	 funeral	 pyre,	 he	 looked	 towards	 his	 mother.	 Sushala’s
eyes	were	dry.	They	burned	with	rage	but	held	no	grief.	Suratha	feared	Arjuna,
but	he	feared	his	mother ’s	wrath	more.
***

“There	is	nothing	to	hold	us	back	now,”	declared	Drona.
“Guru,	 your	 talk	 of	 the	 noble	 values	 of	 war	 only	 served	 to	 get	 Jayadratha
killed,”	 retorted	 Shakuni.	 “You	 insisted	 on	 sticking	 to	 ancient	 rules	 when	 the
other	side	had	no	compunction	in	breaking	them	at	will.”
“Take	care,	Mlecha!	Do	not	presume	to	teach	me	how	to	command.”
“You	can	silence	me,	Guru,	but	can	you	gag	all	our	soldiers?”
Drona	struggled	to	hold	his	temper	in	check.	This	was	not	the	time	and	place	to
take	on	the	foreigner.	“Enough	of	mourning	like	women!	Suyodhana,	convene
the	war	council.”	Without	waiting	for	a	response,	Drona	walked	away.
Suyodhana	felt	his	grief	turn	to	anger.	Shakuni	was	right.	Guru	Drona	had	not
done	anything	to	ensure	victory.	He	would	speak	his	mind	at	the	war	council.	If
the	 Guru	 disliked	 his	 straight	 talk,	 he	 would	 just	 have	 to	 bear	 it.	 As	 Crown
Prince,	he	had	the	right	to	demand	results	from	his	employees.
***
The	battle	raged	day	and	night	for	the	next	three	days.	The	Pandavas	lost	four
akshahounis.	The	night	formations	designed	 by	Drona	confused	and	terrified
them	 with	 their	 brilliant	 use	 of	 light	 and	 shadow,	 deceitful	 moves,	 surprise
attacks,	explosives	and	chemical	weapons.	The	mood	in	the	Pandava	camp	was
sombre.
Despair	hung	heavily	on	Yudhishtra	as	he	paced	his	tent.	“Krishna,	what	do	we
do	 now?	 Shall	we	 sue	 for	 peace?	 So	many	have	 died.	 I	 do	not	wish	to	 rule	a
kingdom	of	widows.	It	is	enough.”
Dhaumya	 banged	 his	 staff	 on	 the	 ground,	 saying,	 “Prince,	 these	 are	 not	 the
words	of	a	Kshatriya.	Do	you	not	wish	to	avenge	your	wife’s	shame?”
“We	have	tried	everything.	Death	and	more	death	has	been	our	only	reward,”
Yudhishtra	cried,	his	heart	heavy,	his	mind	weary	and	his	body	exhausted.
A	 flame-tipped	 arrow	 landed	 in	 the	 neighbouring	 tent,	 setting	 it	 on	 fire.
Soldiers	ran	with	pitchers	of	water,	shouting	to	each	other.

“Guru	Drona	is	attacking	at	night.	He	has	become	ruthless.	The	Asuras	know
how	to	fight	at	night,	but	the	soldiers	of	the	Southern	Confederate	now	refuse
to	help.	They	say	Arjuna	did	not	keep	his	word	and	killed	Jayadratha	by	deceit.
They	have	started	questioning	our	claim	of	being	on	the	side	of	dharma.	I,	too,
feel	 they	 are	 right.	 They	 want	 to	 return	 home	 to	 the	 South.	 We	 should	 have
accepted	their	help	when	they	offered.	We	have	lost.	We	cannot	stop	Drona.	It	is
a	sin	to	fight	the	Guru.”
“Yudhishtra,	 be	 calm.	 Nothing	 is	 lost.	 Everything	 depends	 on	 you.”	 Krishna
placed	a	hand	on	the	eldest	Pandava’s	shoulder.
“How	can	you	say	that,	Krishna?	What	can	I	do?	Even	Arjuna	is	unable	to	get
near	 Drona.	 The	 Guru	 is	 fighting	 like	 a	 man	 possessed.	 He	 is	 like	 Rudra…
Shiva.	No	one	can	touch	him.”
“You	can,	Yudhishtra,”	Krishna’s	said	softly.	His	words	fell	like	a	pebble	into	a
pool,	spreading	its	ripples	wider	and	wider.
“Do	not	mock	me,	Krishna.	Perhaps	you	can	defeat	him,	but	you	have	taken	a
vow	 not	 to	 touch	 any	 weapon	 in	 this	 war.	 Why	 don’t	 you	 lead	 us	 and	 fight
Drona?”
“I	cannot	help	those	who	will	not	help	themselves,”	replied	Krishna.
“What	should	I	do?”
“Tomorrow,	I	will	ask	you	to	do	something.	Do	it	without	questioning.”
“I	am	prepared	to	do	anything	you	say,	Krishna,	for	Hastinapura.	Anything	to
stop	this	bloodshed.	Help	us!”
“Be	patient.	Tomorrow	we	will	turn	the	tables	on	the	Kauravas.”
Another	 flame-tipped	 arrow	 landed	 close	 to	 them,	 throwing	 debris	 and	 sand
into	their	tent.
“I	feel	sad	for	Drona.	What	a	warrior!”	Krishna	said	smiling.
“Only	you	could	smile	when	defeat	is	staring	us	in	the	face,	Krishna,”	Arjuna

said	heavily.
“Tomorrow	you	too,	will	smile,	my	friend,”	Krishna	replied,	“provided	your
righteous	brother	does	what	I	say	and	you	remember	the	lessons	I	imparted	to
you	before	the	fighting	began.”
“Do	not	ask	me	to	do	what	I	did	to	Bhishma	Pitamaha,	Krishna.	His	eyes	haunt
me.	I	do	not	want	such	a	victory.”
“Where	there	is	dharma,	there	will	be	victory,	my	friend,”	Krishna	replied.
As	if	in	answer,	another	flame-tipped	arrow	fell	dangerously	close	to	them	and
an	explosion	boomed	death	into	the	night.	Krishna	did	not	even	bat	an	eye;	nor
did	the	smile	leave	his	lips.
***
Drona	 felt	 elated.	 In	 fourteen	 days	 he	 had	 almost	 ended	 the	 war.	 He	 had
answered	 Suyodhana’s	 rude	 allegations	 about	 siding	 with	 the	 Pandavas,	 with
his	flaming	arrows.	How	dared	Suyodhana	speak	to	him	like	that?	Drona	had
his	faults	but	treachery	was	not	one	of	them.	That	despicable	Mlecha	Shakuni
had	planted	such	ideas	in	the	Crown	Prince’s	mind.	Well,	the	Pandavas	had	lost
two-thirds	of	their	army.	He	had	even	killed	his	old	friend,	Drupada.	But	he	had
yet	to	get	Arjuna.	He	rarely	missed	a	target	but	Krishna	had	managed	to	swerve
the	 chariot	 every	 time.	 For	 one	 evil	 moment,	 Drona	 considered	 shooting
Krishna.	But	his	sense	of	fairness	won	the	battle	of	conscience.	No,	he	would
not	 stoop	 to	 the	 level	 of	 shooting	 an	 unarmed	 charioteer.	 He	 was	 a	 Brahmin
after	 all,	 and	 he	 would	 fight	 as	 per	dharma,	 unlike	 the	 shameless	 Kshatriyas,
who	would	do	anything	to	win.
“Sir!	Terrible	news…”	A	runner	arrived,	panting.
“What	is	it?”	Drona	could	not	hear	clearly	over	the	din	of	battle.
“Sir,	it	is	the	most	terrible	news…”
Drona’s	 heart	 sank.	 There	 could	 only	 be	 one	 thing	 that	 terrible.	 “Where	 is
Aswathama?”	 Drona’s	 lips	 trembled	 and	 his	 eyes	 blurred.	 ‘Oh	 Kripi,	 I	 have
failed	 in	 my	 promise	 to	 you.	 What	 has	 happened	 to	 our	 son?’	 He	 shook	 the

trembling	messenger.	“You	fool!	Tell	me	where	my	son	is!”
The	runner	bowed	his	head.	Drona	held	on	to	the	wheel	of	his	chariot.	“Is	he
wounded	or...?”
The	runner	remained	silent,	not	daring	to	raise	his	head.	He	could	not	face	the
Guru.
“No…no	one	can	touch	my	son	–	not	Arjuna,	nor	any	of	the	Pandavas.	He	is
the	greatest	warrior	in	all	Bharatavarsha.	My	son,	my	son…”
The	runner	turned	and	vanished	among	the	soldiers.	“Take	me	to	Yudhishtra,”
Drona	barked	to	his	charioteer.
“Sir,	it	is	too	dangerous.	He	is	deep	within	enemy	territory.”
“Fool!	Take	me	to	him!”
The	chariot	rushed	to	the	Pandava	side.	Drona’s	arrows	mercilessly	cut	down
anyone	who	dared	stand	in	his	way.	The	opposition	soon	thinned,	till	there	was
no	one	left	fighting	him.	Instead,	the	Pandava	soldiers	stood	bowing	in	respect,
joining	him	in	his	mourning.
‘No,	no…my	Aswathama	cannot	be	dead.	This	is	a	ploy,	a	trick,’	Drona’s	mind
screamed.
Drona	 halted	 beside	 Yudhishtra’s	 chariot.	 When	 he	 saw	 the	 eldest	 Pandava’s
face,	he	understood	that	everything	had	indeed	been	lost.	Nevertheless,	he	had
to	hear	the	truth	from	Yudhishtra.	He	had	been	Drona’s	favourite	student,	after
Arjuna.	 Except	 for	 these	 last	 few	 days	 of	 conflict,	 he	 had	 always	 favoured
Yudhishtra	 over	 Suyodhana.	 No,	 Yudhishtra	 would	 not	 lie	 to	 him.	 Arjuna
would	not	lie	to	him.	They	were	like	his	sons.	He	was	their	Guru.	If	they	turned
away	 from	 him	 now,	 life	 would	 not	 be	 worth	 living.	 His	 favourite	 disciples
would	never	do	that	to	him.
In	a	voice	that	shook	despite	his	efforts	to	remain	stoic,	the	Guru	asked	the	man
who	was	known	never	to	tell	a	lie,	“Yudhishtra,	my	son,	what	has	happened	to
Aswathama?”

Yudhishtra	could	not	face	Drona.	His	gaze	fell	to	his	feet.
“Son,	I	know	you	will	never	lie	to	me.	Tell	your	Guru	what	has	happened.”
Yudhishtra	 hesitated.	 Despite	 the	 cold,	 his	 forehead	 was	 beaded	 with
perspiration.	He	closed	his	eyes	but	his	Guru’s	pleading	face	refused	to	leave
his	 mind.	 He	 swallowed,	 his	 throat	 dry.	 Yudhishtra	 gripped	 his	 spear	 and
prayed	for	courage.
*****

	67			LIES
	
The	 clangour	 of	 war	 stilled	 on	 both	 sides	 as
Yudhisthtra’s	words	fell	softly	into	the	silence.
“ASWATHAMA	 IS	 DEAD!”	

Drona	 clutched	 his	 chest	 and	 collapsed	 to	 the	 floor	 of	 his	 chariot,	 hitting	 his
head	 as	 he	 fell.	 The	 Guru	 had	 already	 lost	 consciousness	 when	 Yudhishtra
mumbled,	“But	it	was	an	elephant.”
Yudhishtra	climbed	down	from	his	chariot	and	walked	away,	not	waiting	to	see
what	would	happen	next.	Dharma	tasted	like	bitter	poison	in	his	mouth.
Krishna	looked	at	Arjuna,	but	his	friend	flung	down	his	bow.	“No,	Krishna,	I
cannot	kill	him.	Not	like	this,	not	after	making	him	believe	we	have	killed	his
son,	 when	 what	 we	 did	 was	 rename	 an	 elephant	 Aswathama	 and	 kill	 the	 poor
beast.	 It	 is	 a	 lie.	 I	 cannot	 live	 this	 lie	 anymore.	 He	 had	 always	 been	 my
benefactor;	 he	 always	 stood	 by	 me.	 Do	 not	 ask	 me	 to	 commit	 another
dishonourable	act.”
Krishna	 looked	 at	 Dhristadyumna,	 their	 nominal	 Commander.	 Draupadi’s
brother	jumped	down	from	his	chariot	with	his	sword	drawn.	“Krishna,	I	thank
you	 for	 this.	 From	 the	 day	 he	 ordered	 Arjuna	 to	 drag	 my	 father	 and	 me	 to
Hastinapura	 in	 chains,	 I	 have	 loathed	 this	 fake	 Guru.	 He	 killed	 my	 father
yesterday.	I	want	nothing	more	than	to	cut	off	his	head.”
Dhristadyumna	 jumped	 into	 Drona’s	 chariot	 and	 caught	 hold	 of	 the
unconscious	Guru’s	hair.	Like	a	watermelon,	he	slit	the	throat	of	the	man	who
had	 nearly	 defeated	 the	 Pandava	 army	 single-handedly,	 holding	 aloft	 the
dripping	head.	“Behold!	The	Commander	of	the	Kauravas!	This	is	my	tribute
to	my	dead	father,	Drupada.	This	is	my	offering	to	Guru	Dhaumya.	See	what	a
gory	end	has	befallen	this	Brahmin,	who	chose	the	side	of	adharma.”
Shikandi	 came	 running	 and	 hugged	 his	 brother,	 dancing	 in	 Drona’s	 chariot.

The	 eunuch	 shouted,	 “Yadho	 dharma,	 thatho	 Jaya.”	 Where	 there	 is	 dharma,
there	will	be	victory.	Dhristadyumna	laughed	aloud.	The	Guru	has	paid	for	his
karma.
Yells	of	jubilation	rose	from	the	Pandava	ranks.	Krishna	did	not	wait	to	watch
Dhristadyumna’s	celebrations.	The	chariot	in	which	Arjuna	sat	grief-stricken,
turned	to	follow	Yudhishtra.
A	cry	of	agony	rose	from	the	Kaurava	ranks	and	the	Pandavas	paused	to	listen.
It	was	Aswathama.	Filled	 with	 murderous	 rage,	 he	 rushed	 screaming	 towards
the	 Pandava	 side,	 while	 Karna	 tried	 to	 restrain	 him.	 With	 Drona’s	 fall,
command	had	shifted	to	Karna’s	shoulders	as	he	was	the	second-in-command.
Aswathama	began	cutting	down	anyone	in	his	path	but	Karna’s	conch	sounded
the	end	of	battle,	shocking	the	Guru’s	son.
“How	dare	you	stop	the	fighting?”	Aswathama	shouted	at	Karna.
“This	is	a	dharmayudha.	The	sun	has	set.	I	will	not	allow	any	transgressions	of
dharma,”	Karna	replied	in	a	flat	tone,	looking	away	from	his	friend.
Aswathama	 turned	 to	 Suyodhana,	 waiting	 for	 him	 to	 overrule	 Karna,	 but
Suyodhana	too,	did	not	look	at	him.	Aswathama’s	heart	hammered	in	his	chest.
The	 Suta	 was	 not	 allowing	 him	 to	 even	 avenge	 his	 father,	 the	 man	 who	 had
saved	 Karna	 from	 Arjuna’s	 arrows	 in	 Virata.	 But	 what	 hurt	 most	 was
Suyodhana’s	silence.
Aswathama	 stood	 paralysed	 with	 grief	 and	 frustration	 as	 he	 watched
Dhristadyumna’s	 men	 turn	 away	 jubiliantly.	 They	 would	 talk	 about	 Karna’s
chivalry	 for	 years,	 but	 Aswathama	 knew	 Karna	 was	 just	 using	 dharma	 as	 a
cloak.	This	was	his	petty	revenge	for	the	treatment	Drona	had	meted	out	to	him
when	the	Suta	came	seeking	knowledge.	Karna	was	using	the	same	dharma	as
revenge.	Dharma	or	adharma,	he	would	get	back	at	Dhristadyumna,	he	would
make	the	Pandavas	pay	a	bitter	price,	the	son	of	Drona	vowed.	He	shouted	at
the	vanishing	figures	of	the	Pandava	warriors,	“Evil	men,	the	fruits	of	karma
are	bitter.	You	are	ecstatic	about	killing	the	most	formidable	warrior	through
deceit?	Do	you	think	the	sin	of	Brahmahatya	will	not	haunt	you?	Then	the	talk
of	the	body	shedding	soiled	clothes	will	not	be	of	any	solace,	and	the	wisdom
of	 being	 detached	 will	 sound	 like	 a	 hollow	 drum.	 I	 will	 get	 you,	 you	 evil

Pandavas!”
Aswathama	fell	to	his	knees	as	soldiers	carried	away	his	father ’s	lifeless	body.
*****

68			DHANAVEERA
	
THEY	 SAT	 BY	 THE	 RIVER,	 listening	 to	 the	 distant	 cries	 of	 the	 chandalas	 as	 they

hauled	off	the	dead	to	the	cremation	ground.	The	breeze	carried	the	lingering
odour	of	burning	flesh.	The	ghostly	light	of	the	flaming	pyres	lit	the	southern
sky.	The	river	looked	sinister	and	the	water	that	sloshed	at	their	feet	was	thick
with	blood.
Aswathama	looked	at	his	reflection	and	cringed	when	the	precious	stone	shone
in	 the	 moonlight.	 It	 had	 brought	 him	 so	 much	 bad	 luck.	 He	 had	 been
inconsolable	since	his	father ’s	death.	“He	died	because	of	me.	I	was	a	worthless
son,	never	able	to	rise	to	his	expectations,”	he	murmured	yet	again.
“Aswathama,	why	are	you	punishing	yourself	like	this?	Guru	Drona	was	proud
of	you.	 He	was	a	 great	 man,”	 Karna	said	to	the	Guru’s	son.	This	was	not	the
time	to	remember	that	Drona	had	always	treated	him	as	a	lowly	Suta,	thought
Karna.
“I	 should	 not	 spoil	 your	 great	 day,	 Karna.	 Congratulations	 on	 becoming
Commander	 of	 the	 Kaurava	 army,	 none	 deserves	 it	 more,”	 Aswathama	 said
without	turning	his	head.
Karna	looked	at	his	friend.	What	was	wrong?	Was	it	that	Aswathama	had	still	to
come	to	terms	with	the	shock	of	his	father ’s	death	or	was	it	something	else?	“I
owe	everything	to	Suyodhana;	Aswathama,	you	know	it	as	well	as	I	do.”
“It	was	long	overdue,	Karna.	No	one	is	more	qualified	than	you	to	command.
Bring	us	victory.	Spare	none	of	the	Pandavas.”
Karna	sighed.	He	was	thankful	for	the	darkness	that	hid	his	face.
“Why	are	you	so	silent,	Karna?”

“I	will	not	spare	Arjuna,	that	I	promise	you.”
“Not	just	Arjuna.	None	of	the	Pandavas	must	be	spared!”
“I	have	given	my	word…”
“Word?”	 Aswathama’s	 breathing	 quickened.	 He	 squinted	 at	 Karna.	 What	 was
his	friend	up	to?
“I	 will	 not	 kill	 any	 of	 the	 Pandavas	 except	 Arjuna.	 I	 have	 given	 my	 word	 to
Kunti	Devi.”
“Karna,	are	you	crazy?”
“I	could	not	refuse.	She	begged	for	the	lives	of	all	her	sons.”
“You	 are	 a	 traitor!	 You	 should	 be	 tried	 for	 treason	 and	 hanged,”	 yelled
Aswathama,	 grabbing	 Karna	 roughly.	 “You	 cunning	 rascal!	 Let	 us	 see	 what
Suyodhana	has	to	say	about	this.	The	Suta	has	shown	his	true	colours.”
Aswathama	 jumped	 up	 and	 would	 have	 run	 towards	 the	 camp	 had	 Karna	 not
held	 him	 back.	 “Listen	 to	 me,	 Aswathama!	 I	 have	 vowed	 to	 kill	 Arjuna	 and
defeat	the	Pandavas.”	How	could	he	tell	his	friend	that	he	was	the	eldest	of	all
the	Kurus	and	not	a	lowly	Suta?	How	could	he	say	the	throne	was	his	for	the
asking,	that	he	could	end	the	war	if	he	agreed	to	become	King?	That	would	be
the	greatest	act	of	disloyalty	to	Suyodhana.	“Trust	me,	Aswathama.	I	will	win
this	war	and	see	Suyodhana	crowned	King.”
Aswathama	 looked	 at	 his	 friend.	 “I	 don’t	 want	 to	 create	 a	 rift	 in	 the	 camp,
Karna,	but	Suyodhana	will	be	heartbroken	if	he	hears	this.	How	could	you	do
it?	Suta,	you	are	no	longer	my	friend.	I	will	be	watching	your	conduct	on	the
battlefield.	If	I	find	the	slightest	hesitation	in	you,	the	arrow	in	your	throat	will
be	 mine.	 A	traitor	as	our	 Commander-in-Chief!	There	 is	 no	bigger	fool	than
Suyodhana!”	Shrugging	off	Karna’s	grip,	Aswathama	walked	away.
“Aswathama,	 stop!”	 Karna	 called	 out	 but	 the	 Brahmin	 had	 vanished	 into	 the
shadows	 of	 night.	 Traitor!	 The	 word	 pierced	 Karna’s	 conscience.	 Was	 he
indeed	 a	 traitor	 to	 the	 man	 who	 had	 done	 everything	 for	 him?	 He	 had	 no
answer.	But	there	was	no	question	of	going	back	on	his	word,	either.	There	was

only	one	thing	left	to	do	–	fight	until	he	won	or	die	in	the	attempt.	‘Forgive	me
Suyodhana…Aswathama…I	never	deserved	your	friendship.’
“Karna!”	 The	 voice	 startled	 Karna	 from	 his	 reverie	 and	 his	 hand	 went
instinctively	 to	 his	 sword.	 He	 relaxed	 when	 he	 saw	 an	 old	 Brahmin	 standing
near	him.	The	face	seemed	oddly	familiar.	“I	have	come	to	seek	alms.”
Karna	knew	he	had	heard	that	voice	before.	He	looked	at	the	stooping	figure
with	suspicion.	Who	was	that	standing	behind	the	mendicant	in	the	dark,	almost
hidden	by	the	bushes?
“Promise	you	will	give	me	what	I	ask.”
“I	 know	 you	 from	 somewhere,	 Swami,”	 Karna	 replied,	 peering	 at	 the	 figure
before	him.
“No	 one	 knows	 me.	 I	 am	 a	 nonentity.	 Give	 me	 your	 word	 and	 keep	 your
reputation	as	the	man	who	never	denies	anyone	anything.”
Karna	sensed	a	trap.	The	man	standing	before	him	was	no	ordinary	Brahmin.
Feeling	helpless	in	the	face	of	a	request	for	alms,	he	said,	“Ask	and	it	shall	be
yours.”
“Give	me	your	armour,	forged	by	the	great	smiths	of	the	Surya	temple.”
Karna	was	shocked.	“What	does	a	Brahmin	want	with	a	warrior ’s	armour?”
“Karna,	deny	me	and	I	will	go	away	without	complaint.	I	understand.	It	is	your
only	protection	against	Arjuna’s	arrows.	Without	it,	you	will	not	last	for	more
than	a	few	minutes	before	my	son.”
“What	did	you	say?	Your	son?	Who	are	you?	Indra?	Has	the	Lord	of	the	Devas
stooped	to	this	level	to	protect	his	son?”
How	dared	Indra	 even	suggest	he	could	 not	 face	Arjuna	without	his	armour?
Karna	undid	the	armour	and	waited	for	the	Brahmin	to	extend	his	hand.	“Take
it.	Know	that	my	dharma	is	my	protection.	If	your	son	thinks	he	has	to	strip	me
to	 beat	 me,	 then	 go	 and	 tell	 him	 that	 Karna	 stands	 naked.	 With	 or	 without
armour,	this	Suta	will	defeat	him.”

Indra	looked	at	Karna	with	admiration	in	his	old	eyes.	“Son,	I	have	no	words
for	 your	 chivalry	 and	 bravery.	 If	 there	 is	 any	 fairness	 left	 in	 this	 world,	 you
will	win.	We	are	both	cast-offs	–	you	by	your	mother	and	I	by	my	son.	But	I	am
still	his	father	and	this	my	gift	to	him.”
“Every	moment	I	 feel	I	am	 betraying	Suyodhana.	Sir,	you	 have	got	what	you
came	for.	Now	please	leave	me	alone.”
“Karna,	I	am	a	fair	man.	Allow	me	to	repay	your	generosity.	Else,	I	will	not	be
able	to	sleep	with	a	clear	conscience.”
Karna	looked	at	the	old	man	in	surprise.	Was	he	trying	to	pull	another	trick?
Indra	turned	and	signalled.	A	dark	figure	emerged	from	behind	a	bush.	In	the
dull	moonlight,	the	man’s	eyes	glittered	liked	diamonds	in	his	dark	face.
“Karna,	 this	 is	 my	 son,	 Mayasura,	 the	 greatest	 sculptor	 to	 have	 walked	 this
earth	–	the	man	who	created	Indraprastha,	the	city	named	after	me.	Yes,	life	is
full	 of	 irony	 is	 it	 not?	 Maya,	 bow	 to	 the	 great	 Karna.	 You	 will	 see	 none	 like
him	in	this	world	or	the	next.”
Karna	looked	at	the	coal-black	Asura	in	surprise.
“Give	it	to	him,”	Indra	ordered	and	Mayasura	placed	a	thick	arrow	in	Karna’s
hands.	It	was	sharp,	sturdy	and	beautifully	forged.
“Yantra	muktha?”	Karna	asked,	running	his	fingers	along	the	smooth	contours
of	the	missile.
“Yes,	with	the	power	of	the	vajra.	It	is	called	Shakti,	after	the	Mother	Goddess.
Truthfully,	 I	 was	 planning	 to	 give	 it	 to	 Arjuna.	 I	 was	 cynical	 about	 your
reputation	and	wanted	to	test	it.	But	now,	how	I	wish	you	were	my	son,	Karna.
This	is	my	gift	to	you.	It	can	only	be	used	once,	but	it	has	unimaginable	power.
Perhaps	 you	 will	 use	 it	 against	 my	 son.	 No	 one	 can	 accuse	 Indra	 of	 being
unfair.	I	may	be	poor	and	broken	today,	but	I	am	still	King	of	the	Devas.”
“I	humbly	accept	your	offering,	Lord	Indra,”	Karna	said,	placing	the	missile	in
his	quiver.	Then	he	took	Mayasura’s	coarse	hands	in	his.	“If	we	win	this	war,	be
assured	that	these	hands	will	once	again	build	beautiful	gardens	and	temples.	I
am	honoured	to	have	met	you.”

“My	son	has	not	been	of	sound	mind	since	we	were	evicted	from	Indraprastha.
Forgive	 him	 if	 he	 has	 not	 treated	 you	 with	 proper	 respect.”	 Indra	 took
Mayasura’s	arm	and	walked	away	with	Karna’s	priceless	armour.
Karna	 looked	 at	 the	 disappearing	 figures,	 pondering	 over	 life’s	 ironies.	 He
scanned	the	battleground	and	saw	the	silhouette	of	Iravan’s	head.	A	wasted	life,
he	 thought.	 Why	 did	 the	 Nagas	 and	 Rakshasas	 even	 bother	 to	 fight	 this	 war?
This	 was	 a	 Kshatriya	 war.	 The	 knowledge	 that	 he	 too	 was	 a	 Kshatriya	 was
more	 of	 a	 relief	 than	 he	 would	 admit.	 He	 would	 prove	 that	 he	 was	 a	 better
Kshatriya	than	anyone	who	fought	on	either	side.	He	would	be	generous	in	his
gifts	and	noble	in	abiding	by	the	laws	of	warfare.	That	was	the	Kshatriya	code
of	honour.	That	was	what	set	them	apart	from	other	men.
But	 in	 the	 dead	 of	 the	 night,	 when	 silence	 reigned,	 except	 for	 the	 moans	 of
dying	 men	 and	 beasts,	 a	 sense	 of	 deep	 guilt	 assaulted	 Karna.	 Aswathama’s
words	came	to	haunt	him.	By	keeping	his	word	to	Kunti	and	giving	his	armour
to	 Indra,	 he	 might	 earn	 eternal	 fame,	 but	 was	 it	 not	 a	 betrayal	 of	 the	 trust
Suyodhana	had	placed	in	him?	He	had	no	answer.	The	time	had	come	to	fight
Arjuna,	man	to	man,	without	the	protection	of	his	armour.	Let	destiny	decide
who	the	better	warrior	was	and	who	the	better	man.
*****

69			RAKSHASA
	
KHATOTKACHA	 WAS	 GETTING	 IMPATIENT.	 “Mother,	 Lord	 Krishna	 himself	 sent	 a

messenger	 to	 fetch	 me.	 He	 says	 only	 I	 can	 save	 my	 father	 from	 that	 Suta
warrior.”
“You	 are	 just	 a	 boy,	 Khatotkacha.	 If	 your	 father	 cannot	 stop	 Karna,	 how	 can
you?”
“The	messenger	says	my	father	is	asking	for	me.	I	am	his	only	hope.”
“You	are	the	only	one	I	have,	my	son.	It	is	not	our	war.”
“My	father	needs	me,	Mother.	I	must	go.”
“Father!	Now	he	remembers	his	son?	The	last	time	we	saw	him,	he	would	not
even	look	at	me.	You	are	a	Rakshasa,	a	forest	dweller,	the	son	of	a	Rakshasi.”
There	 was	 no	 point	 arguing	 with	 her.	 Khatotkacha	 touched	 her	 feet	 but
Hidumbi	did	not	move.	He	turned	to	go.
“Go	and	die!	You	know	how	they	treated	Iravan.	Oh	Shiva,	I	will	have	no	one
to	care	for	me	in	my	old	age.”
Khatotkacha	stopped	at	the	door	and	turned	back.	“Is	this	your	final	blessing,
mother?	Maybe	you	will	only	see	my	dead	face.”
“Oh,	 no,	no…I	did	not	 mean	 it,	 son.	Don’t	go!”	Hidumbi	came	running	 after
him,	but	her	son	did	not	look	back.
An	owl	flew	past	Khatotkacha.	An	owl	in	the	daytime?	A	bad	omen.	A	strange
fear	 gripped	 the	 superstitious	 Rakshasa.	 Then	 he	 shrugged	 and	 picked	 up	 his
stone	 mace	 from	 the	 corner	 of	 the	 mud	 veranda.	 A	 few	 of	 his	 Nishada	 and

Naga	friends	were	waiting	for	him,	armed	with	bows,	poisoned	arrows,	spears,
crude	swords	and	stone	maces.	Khatotkacha	nodded	to	them.	“Come,	let	us	go
to	Kurukshetra	and	teach	that	Suta	a	lesson!”
Shrieking	and	screaming,	the	Rakshasa	and	his	savage	friends	started	running.
They	had	to	save	the	Pandavas	from	a	humiliating	defeat	at	the	hands	of	Karna.
The	 owl	 that	 had	 perched	 on	 the	 roof	 hooted	 ominously	 thrice	 and	 then	 flew
away	into	the	jungle.
***
“Son,	 no	 rules	 apply	 to	 you.	 Rakshasas	 are	 experts	 in	 night	 warfare.	 Wreak
havoc	in	the	Kaurava	ranks,”	Krishna	instructed.
Khatotkacha	 sneaked	 a	 peek	 at	 his	 impassive	 father.	 Bhima	 sat	 polishing	 his
huge	mace.	He	had	not	spoken	to	his	son	since	his	arrival	at	the	Pandava	camp.
“Go	talk	to	your	father.”	Krishna	patted	Khatotkacha’s	shoulder.
The	Rakshasa	moved	towards	his	father	with	hesitant	steps,	afraid	he	would	be
snubbed.	He	just	stood	there,	awkward	and	tongue-tied.	Finally,	Bhima	looked
up	 and	 smiled	 at	 his	 son.	 Khatotkacha	 dropped	 to	 the	 ground	 and	 bowed	 his
head.	Would	his	touch	pollute	the	Kshatriya?
Bhima’s	 strong	 arms	 lifted	 him	 up.	 “How	 you	 have	 grown!”	 he	 said	 and
abruptly	walked	away.
Was	that	all?	Khatotkacha	had	imagined	this	reunion	so	many	times.	Bhima	had
not	even	inquired	about	his	mother.
***
The	next	morning	was	colder	than	usual.	Kurukshetra	stretched	far	and	wide.
Khatotkacha	felt	a	shiver	of	anticipation.	He	was	going	to	fight	Kshatriyas.	In
doing	so,	his	father	was	bestowing	a	great	honour	on	his	Rakshasa	son.	Soon,
he	would	face	mighty	warriors	like	Karna,	Suyodhana,	Kripa,	Aswathama,	and
others.	 Katotkacha	 was	 nervous.	 He	 had	 to	 make	 his	 father	 proud.	 He	 looked
again	 at	 the	 vast	 battlefield	 and	 shuddered.	 This	 time	 it	 was	 not	 the	 chill	 that
made	 him	 shiver.	 The	 gory	 face	 of	 Iravan	 stared	 back	 at	 him.	 The	 Rakshasa

gripped	his	stone	mace	and	prayed,	“Oh	Shiva,	give	me	the	courage	to	face	the
mighty.”
***
The	war	took	an	ugly	turn	after	the	Nishadas	and	Rakshasas	under	Khatotkacha
joined	the	Pandava	side.	The	forest	dwellers	jumped	from	elephant	to	elephant
and	darted	through	the	cavalry.	Their	wild	cries	made	the	beasts	run	wild.	They
climbed	chariots	with	monkey-like	agility,	shot	their	poison-tipped	arrows	and
vanished	 like	 magic.	 Their	 recklessness	 shattered	 Karna’s	 classical	 war
formations.
Seeing	Shakuni	once	again	near	his	 friend,	Aswathama	rushed	to	Suyodhana.
“It	seems	your	friend	is	not	fighting	with	his	heart,”	the	Gandharan	was	saying.
“If	 Karna	 does	 not	 fight	 for	 me,	 no	 one	 ever	 will,”	 Suyodhana	 retorted	 with
complete	conviction.
Shakuni	 eyed	 Aswathama	 and	 suppressed	 a	 smile.	 “Your	 trust	 in	 the	 Suta	 is
touching	but	he	is	not	worried	about	you;	he	is	after	glory.”
Suyodhana	 turned	 to	 his	 uncle	 in	 irritation.	 “Can	 you	 not	 see	 how	 Karna	 is
struggling	to	save	us	from	that	Rakshasa?”
“Oh	certainly,	but	ask	him	why	he	spared	Yudhishtra	and	Bhima	today.	He	cut
off	their	bows	and	mace,	yet	he	didn’t	kill	them.”
Aswathama	saw	a	frown	crease	Suyodhana’s	face	as	he	prodded	his	charioteer
towards	 Karna.	 Aswathama	 was	 shocked	 to	 learn	 that	 the	 Pandavas	 had	 been
spared.	Could	there	be	a	greater	traitor	than	Karna?	He	had	to	warn	Suyodhana.
When	he	reached	his	friends,	they	were	arguing.
“No	 more	 arguments,	 Karna.	 I	 want	 the	 Rakshasa	 dead,”	 Suyodhana	 said,
finishing	his	tirade.
“Suyodhana,	 I	 will	 not	 lie.	 I	 spared	 Yudhishtra	 and	 Bhima’s	 lives	 today.	 My
fight	is	with	Arjuna,	and	I	will	kill	him.”
Karna’s	charioteer	howled	with	laughter.	“The	Suta	had	the	chance	to	kill	the

twins	too,	but	he	did	not.	What	a	fool	I	carry	in	my	chariot!”
Suyodhana	 ignored	 Shalya	 and	 turned	 to	 Karna.	 “This	 war	 is	 not	 about	 your
personal	vendetta.	We	are	fighting	for	a	cause.	Why	did	you	give	your	armour
away?	Why	are	you	not	using	the	so-called	magical	weapon	Indra	gave	you?”
“Suyodhana,	I	have	kept	the	Shakti	for	Arjuna.”
Shalya	smirked.	“This	Suta	will	die	still	hugging	that	stupid	astra.	No	one	has
even	heard	of	it.	I	am	afraid	it	will	burst	behind	my	back	at	any	moment.	Dream
on,	Suta,	but	if	you	want	to	win	this	war,	use	the	ageneya	astra	and	finish	off	all
the	Pandavas.	Throw	away	that	stupid	thing	given	to	you	by	that	Asura.”
“Sir,	I	must	ask	for	your	silence,”	Suyodhana	said	to	Shalya.
“Alright,	if	you	do	not	value	my	advice,	I	will	not	give	it.	Once	a	Suta,	always	a
Suta.”	Shalya	cracked	his	whip	and	laughed.
Suyodhana	 felt	 like	 smashing	 his	 mace	 on	 Shalya’s	 head	 but	 controlled
himself.	He	said	to	Karna,	“That	Rakshasa	will	have	finished	us	all	long	before
you	reach	Arjuna.	I	am	disappointed	in	you,	Karna.”
Suyodhana	moved	away	in	his	chariot,	leaving	behind	a	devastated	Karna.	Did
Suyodhana	suspect	his	loyalty	after	all	he	had	done?
Aswathama	 watched	Karna	lift	the	Shakti	 and	 put	 it	 into	 the	 yantra	 to	 launch.
“Traitor!”	he	hissed.
“The	Brahmin	said	it	right.	You	are	a	coward	and	a	traitor.”	Shalya	whipped	the
horses	and	the	chariot	hurtled	towards	Khatotkacha	at	breakneck	speed.	Karna
cranked	the	yantra,	tightening	it	to	launch	the	Shakti	astra.
“Watch	out	Suta,	it	is	going	to	burst	in	your	face,”	Shalya	shouted	into	the	wind
over	the	rattle	of	the	chariot.
Karna	looked	for	Khatotkacha	and	pointed	the	yantra	at	him.	He	was	throwing
flaming	torches	at	the	Kaurava	cavalry	with	both	hands.	The	Rakshasa	would
never	know	what	hit	him,	thought	Karna,	tightening	the	tension	another	notch.

Khatotkacha	 saw	 a	 ball	 of	 fire	 coming	 towards	 him	 at	 great	 speed.	 People
screamed	and	ran	in	all	directions	but	he	stood	paralyzed	as	the	astra	whistled
through	 the	 air	 towards	 him.	 He	 knew	 this	 was	 the	 end	 and	 his	 mind	 was
strangely	calm.	The	earth	shook	with	a	loud	explosion	and	he	was	thrown	into
the	air.
When	Khatotkacha	opened	his	eyes,	the	severed	limbs	of	men	and	beasts	were
still	raining	down	around	him.	He	did	not	feel	any	pain.	He	tried	to	get	up,	but
it	 felt	 as	 if	 he	 had	 no	 body.	 When	 the	 soot	 and	 smoke	 cleared,	 he	 saw	 many
faces	peering	down	at	him.	They	all	appeared	to	be	standing	at	a	great	height.
Where	 the	 Shakti	 had	 touched	 the	 ground,	 a	 huge	 crater	 had	 formed	 and
Khatotkacha	 was	 lying	 in	 it.	 The	 look	 of	 horror	 in	 their	 eyes	 confirmed	 his
worst	fears.	He	saw	Bhima	staring	down	at	him	from	the	edge	of	the	crater	and
tried	to	get	up	to	greet	his	father,	but	he	could	not	feel	his	arms.
“He	has	no	limbs	left,”	someone	said.	Khatotkacha	blinked	and	waited	for	his
father	to	come	down	and	talk	to	him.	He	could	hear	the	Kauravas	celebrating
his	fall.	He	heard	other	voices	and	saw	his	uncles	join	his	father.	They	looked
somehow	relieved.
“Karna	 used	 the	 Shakti	 on	 Khatotkacha.	 Now	 he	 has	 nothing,	 Arjuna,”
remarked	Yudhishtra.
“All	Rakshasas	have	to	be	killed	one	day	or	the	other,	Bhima.	It	is	good	he	is
dying	for	dharma,”	Krishna	said	and	Bhima	blinked.
‘You	would	have	killed	me	because	I	am	a	Rakshasa,	Father?	I	don’t	know	what
dharma	is,	I	am	just	a	forest	dweller.	I	did	my	best	for	you.’	Gradually,	Bhima’s
face	faded	away.	The	sounds	of	celebrations	died.	His	mother	had	been	right	–
this	was	not	their	war.
As	the	celebrations	continued	on	both	sides	of	the	great	field	of	Kurukshetra,
darkness	cloaked	the	Rakshasa	in	silence.
***
Suyodhana	lay	awake	in	his	tent,	wondering	if	Karna	had	betrayed	him.	What
right	had	he	to	give	away	his	armour,	to	make	promises	that	could	lose	them

the	 war?	 Was	 not	 his	 friendship	 enough?	 Suyodhana	 felt	 bitter	 for	 having
placed	all	his	trust	and	hope	in	Karna.	Bhanumati	had	been	right,	the	Suta	had
ditched	 him	 when	 it	 mattered	 the	 most.	 His	 mother	 was	 right;	 he	 had	 been	 a
fool.	 Who	 else	 would	 cheat	 him?	 He	 wondered	 if	 he	 should	 order	 Karna’s
arrest	and	try	him	for	treason.	No...	surely	his	Karna	could	never	betray	him?
Had	he	not	used	the	Shakti	on	the	Rakshasa	boy?	Was	he	not	inviting	his	own
death	 by	 giving	 away	 his	 armour?	 There	 had	 to	 be	 some	 reason	 for	 Karna’s
strange	behaviour.
Battered	 on	 all	 sides	 by	 accusations	 of	 evil	 doing,	 Suyodhana	 had	 for	 some
time	 wondered	 about	 their	 truth,	 following	 the	 madness	 of	 trying	 to	 disrobe
Draupadi.	He	had	often	drawn	strength	from	his	own	noble	action	of	making	a
Suta	a	King.	It	had	defined	him.	It	had	convinced	him	that	he	was	not	the	evil
man	 hungry	 for	 power	 that	 his	 opponents	 made	 him	 out	 to	 be.	 Suyodhana
needed	to	believe	in	Karna’s	sincerity	in	order	to	find	meaning	in	his	life.	No,
he	could	not	believe	Karna	did	anything	for	selfish	reasons.	He	would	win	the
war	 for	 them.	 They	 all	 shared	 a	 common	 dream	 of	 a	 better	 tomorrow	 for
Bharatavarsha	 –	 he,	 Aswathama	 and	 Karna.	 If	 one	 of	 them	 betrayed	 another,
life	 would	 not	 be	 worth	 living	 anymore.	 He	 had	 to	 bury	 all	 doubts.	 If	 Karna
proved	to	be	a	self-serving	man,	what	then	was	the	point	of	winning?
*****

70			DEATH	OF	A	MLECHA
	
THE	 NIGHT	 WAS	 DAMP	 WITH	 THE	 PROMISE	

of	 much	 awaited	 rain.	 It	 was	 the
seventeenth	 day	 of	 carnage	 in	 the	 temple	 of	 dharma.	 Among	 the	 thousands
crying	over	the	loss	of	loved	ones,	one	heart-wrenching	cry	stood	apart	in	its
poignancy.	Krishna,	four	of	the	Pandavas	and	Draupadi,	stood	huddled	near	the
fire,	 too	 numb	 to	 speak,	 while	 Bhima	 sat	 in	 the	 darkness,	 his	 howls	 of	 grief
rising	above	the	howling	wind,	almost	primeval	in	their	intensity.
“Bhima,	please	understand	that	he	was	a	Rakshasa.	This	is	a	war	and	warriors
die.	It	is	hard,	but	that	is	how	life	is,”	Krishna	said.	Bhima	let	out	another	howl.
Bhima	had	been	silent	until	they	brought	up	Khatotkacha’s	inert	body	from	the
crater.	 But	 all	 hell	 had	 broken	 loose	 when	 he	 was	 asked	 to	 light	 his	 son’s
funeral	 pyre.	 Since	 then,	 the	 second	 Pandava	 had	 not	 ceased	 his	 wordless
crying,	 an	 agonised	 howling	 that	 went	 on	 and	 on.	 With	 words,	 they	 tried	 to
reason	with	him.	With	pain,	he	answered	them	back.
“It	 is	 useless	 to	 talk	 to	 him,”	 Krishna	 said	 in	 a	 tired	 voice,	 sitting	 down	 near
Arjuna.
“Watching	 him	 before,	 one	 would	 never	 have	 thought	 he	 cared	 for	 his
Rakshasa	son.	He	did	not	even	speak	two	words	to	the	boy.	But	the	agony	of	a
silent	man	is	the	most	painful	to	watch,”	Arjuna	said.	Bhima’s	wails	rose	again
and	they	all	shuddered.	“Krishna,	is	the	war	worth	all	this?	Dharma	has	given
us	only	misery.	I	am	not	even	sure	who	is	righteous	and	who	is	evil.”	Arjuna
shook	 his	 head.	 Far	 away,	 smoke	 from	 the	 funeral	 pyres	 snaked	 towards
heaven.
“I	explained	everything	to	you	before	the	war.	If	you	do	not	have	the	answers
even	now,	I	have	nothing	more	to	say,”	Krishna	replied.
“Krishna,	I	admire	your	wisdom.	Great	men	will	praise	those	words.	Alas,	men

like	Bhima	and	I	do	not	possess	the	intelligence	to	understand	your	meaning.
We	 are	 neither	 rishis	 nor	 scholars.	 I	 wish	 I	 could	 have	 cried	 as	 he	 is	 doing,
when	I	lost	Abhimanyu.	It	is	hard	to	be	detached	about	what	I	do,	Krishna.	Why
should	we	fight	our	own	cousins	and	lose	everything?”
“It	is	your	duty	to	fight,	Arjuna.	Don’t	worry	about	the	results.”
“The	outcome	scares	me,	Krishna.	When	all	that	gives	meaning	to	life	is	lost,
what	 use	 is	 victory?	 Tomorrow	 will	 be	 terrible.	 I	 am	 not	 afraid	 Krishna,	 but
Karna	will	be	a	tough	opponent,	with	or	without	his	armour.”
“Arjuna,	 just	 do	 your	 duty,	 the	 rest	 will	 take	 care	 of	 itself.	 You	 must	 take
advantage	of	the	slightest	opportunity	that	presents	itself.”
“Karna	may	be	a	Suta,	but	he	is	a	great	warrior.	Krishna,	I	wish	to	win	fairly
against	him,	unlike	what	we	did	to	Pitamaha	or	Guru...”
“How	naive	you	still	are,	Arjuna	my	friend,”	Krishna	said	with	a	smile.	“Once
you	win,	everything	will	be	considered	fair.”
***
Suyodhana	had	instructed	the	Brahmin	never	to	leave	Karna	alone,	even	for	a
moment,	and	to	support	him	in	finding	Arjuna.	But	he	had	other	plans.	Karna
was	 capable	 of	 looking	 after	 himself.	 There	 was	 a	 bigger	 enemy	 Aswathama
had	to	take	on	–	one	within	their	own	ranks.	He	should	have	done	it	long	ago.
Aswathama	 rode	 towards	 Shakuni.	 The	 Gandharan	 was	 watching	 something
with	 unwavering	 concentration.	 He	 had	 to	 get	 the	 wily	 foreigner	 alone.
Aswathama	 assessed	 his	 chances	 of	 shooting	 Shakuni,	 as	 if	 by	 accident.	 No,
Suyodhana	would	see	through	it.	Besides,	the	Gandharan	wore	heavy	armour
and	was	a	formidable	warrior.	He	ruled	out	special	astras	since	the	casualties
on	 his	 own	 side	 would	 be	 huge.	 That	 was	 something	 the	 Kauravas	 could	 not
afford.	 No,	 he	 would	 not	 shed	 the	 blood	 of	 innocents	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 one
Mlecha.
“Hiding	in	the	rear,	coward?”	Aswathama	taunted,	hoping	to	provoke	Shakuni.
“Ah,	my	favourite	Brahmin	boy!”	Shakuni	turned	around	smiling.

“Sahadeva	 is	 looking	 for	 you,	 Mlecha.	 Remember,	 the	 youngest	 Pandava	 has
vowed	to	kill	you.	It’s	just	as	well	you	are	hiding	here	at	the	rear	to	save	your
thick	skin.”
“Hmm,	 but	 what	 is	 it	 that	 you	 are	 doing	 here	 instead	 of	 supporting	 the	 Suta?
Today	is	the	day	he	is	taking	on	Arjuna.	Don’t	you	want	to	watch	Karna	die?”
Shakuni	chuckled.
“You	scoundrel!	Traitor!	You	are	not	even	fit	to	speak	his	name.	What	has	the
Gandharan	army	done	for	the	Kauravas	other	than	to	stuff	their	stomachs?”
“Grand	 words,	 Brahmin,	 but	 see	 what	 is	 happening	 to	 your	 Suta	 friend.
Krishna	 has	 laid	 a	 trap	 and	 Karna	 has	 fallen	 right	 into	 it.	 Can	 you	 see	 where
they	 are	 going?”	 Shakuni	 asked,	 shielding	 his	 eyes	 with	 his	 hand	 and	 gazing
into	the	distance.
Aswathama	 followed	 Shakuni’s	 gaze	 and	 saw	 two	 chariots	 racing	 away.	 One
flew	 the	 flag	 of	 Hanuman	 and	 the	 other	 chasing	 it	 had	 the	 emblem	 of	 Surya.
Was	Karna	chasing	Arjuna	or	was	Krishna	leading	Karna	into	the	swamps	of
the	 Ganga?	 Something	 was	 wrong,	 terribly	 wrong.	 Aswathama	 jumped	 into
Shakuni’s	chariot.
“Hey,	what	do	you	think	you	are	doing?”	Shakuni	cried	in	surprise.
Aswathama	 lunged	 and	 grabbed	 the	 whip	 from	 Shakuni’s	 charioteer.	 In	 one
swift	 movement	he	 lashed	 at	Shakuni.	The	whip	 caught	the	 Gandharan’s	nose
and	 split	 it	 open.	 Caught	 unawares,	 Shakuni	 staggered	 and	 fell	 to	 the	 chariot
floor.	Aswathama	pushed	Shakuni’s	charioteer	out	and	whipped	the	horses.	The
chariot	flew	forward,	leaving	the	fallen	charioteer ’s	cries	far	behind.
Shakuni	rose	and	drew	his	sword.	Aswathama	whirled	the	chariot	round	on	one
wheel,	 catching	 Shakuni	 off	 balance	 and	 cracked	 his	 whip	 at	 the	 Gandharan
again.	Sudden	searing	pain	shot	through	Aswathama’s	arms.	An	arrow	had	hit
him.	Another	zipped	past	his	throat.	Who	was	shooting	at	him?
Shakuni	 leapt	 at	 Aswathama	 again	 but	 the	 Brahmin	 cracked	 his	 whip	 and
tripped	him.	Another	arrow	hit	Aswathama’s	arm,	making	him	scowl	in	pain.
Then	 he	 saw	 who	 was	 shooting	 at	 him	 –	 Uluka.	 Shakuni’s	 son	 was	 riding

parallel	 to	 his	 chariot.	 ‘Good,’	 thought	 Aswathama,	 if	 his	 plan	 worked,	 he
could	 take	 out	 both	 father	 and	 son	 together.	 His	 plan	 was	 crazy,	 reckless	 and
brave.	 He	 was	 tempted	 to	 fight	 them	 in	 a	 straight	 duel	 but	 the	 last	 thing	 he
wanted	was	for	the	remnants	of	the	Kaurava	army	to	begin	fighting	each	other.
No,	it	had	to	appear	as	though	the	Pandavas	had	killed	the	Mlecha.
Aswathama	jumped	back	into	the	chariot	from	the	charioteer ’s	seat	and	kicked
Shakuni.	 The	 chariot	 raced	 on	 towards	 the	 Pandava	 side.	 Shakuni	 swung	 his
sword	 and	 wounded	 Aswathama	 on	 the	 thigh.	 The	 Brahmin	 fell	 and	 rolled
over.	With	a	maniacal	grin,	Shakuni	thrust	again.	But	Aswathama	had	feigned
his	 fall	 and	 was	 waiting	 for	 his	 moment.	 He	 rolled	 away	 from	 the	 fastdescending	 sword	 and	 was	 on	 his	 feet	 in	 a	 flash,	 while	 Shakuni	 struggled	 to
free	his	sword	which	had	plunged	two	feet	into	the	wooden	floor	of	the	chariot.
Aswathama	coiled	the	whip	around	Shakuni’s	throat	and	whispered	in	his	ear,
“Game	over,	Mlecha!”
“Shoot,	Uluka,	shoot!”	Shakuni	yelled	to	his	son,	galloping	beside	them.	Uluka
hesitated.	 What	 if	 he	 hit	 and	 killed	 his	 father?	 “Shoot!”	 Shakuni	 cried
desperately,	but	the	boy	merely	stared	back	in	an	agony	of	indecision.
They	were	only	a	few	feet	away	from	the	Pandava	lines	and	Aswathama	could
see	 the	 surprise	 and	 shock	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	 Pandava	 soldiers.	 A	 shower	 of
arrows	 welcomed	 them	 as	 both	 chariots	 broke	 into	 the	 Pandava	 formation.
Soldiers	 tried	 to	 stop	 them,	 thinking	 it	 to	 be	 a	 surprise	 attack	 on	 their
Commander,	Sahadeva.	The	chariots	ran	over	men,	crashed	into	others,	but	did
not	halt.	Aswathama	did	not	know	how	many	arrows	hit	him.	He	held	on	to	the
throat	 of	 the	 Mlecha,	 ignoring	 his	 own	 pain	 and	 trying	 not	 to	 think	 of
impending	death.	The	chariot	floor	was	wet	with	blood	–	his	and	the	Mlecha’s.
Finally,	 Uluka	 fell	 with	 an	 arrow	 to	 his	 throat.	 Aswathama	 hissed	 into
Shakuni’s	ear,	“There	goes	the	Gandharan	heir.”
Shakuni	uttered	a	cry	of	agony	as	his	son	died	before	his	eyes.	Aswathama	felt
the	Gandharan	going	limp	in	his	hands.	“You	are	next,	Mlecha,”	he	hissed.
Their	 chariot	 crashed	 into	 Sahadeva’s,	 throwing	 the	 youngest	 Pandava	 off
balance.	Aswathama	shoved	Shakuni	out	of	the	chariot	and	the	Gandharan	fell

face	down.	But	he	scrambled	up,	holding	on	to	Sahadeva’s	chariot	for	support.
Sahadeva	aimed	an	arrow	at	Aswathama	but	his	bow	broke	into	two	before	he
could	shoot.
“Kid,	 take	 your	 time	 with	 the	 Mlecha.	 I	 have	 a	 friend	 to	 save	 from	 your
brother,”	Aswathama	said,	slinging	his	bow	back	over	his	shoulder	and	taking
the	whip	in	his	hand.
Stunned	 by	 such	 an	 extraordinary	 feat	 of	 archery,	 Sahadeva	 looked	 at	 the
Brahmin	 warrior	 covered	 with	 blood.	 Before	 he	 could	 react,	 Aswathama’s
chariot	had	vanished	behind	a	cloud	of	dust.
Shakuni	eyed	Sahadeva,	surrounded	by	scores	of	Pandava	soldiers.	He	knew	he
had	only	a	few	moments	to	live.	He	should	have	killed	that	bloody	Brahmin	in
Gandhara	 when	 he	 had	 had	 the	 chance.	 Nevertheless,	 Shakuni	 had	 achieved
what	he	had	lived	for	–	India	was	dying	before	his	eyes.	He	had	won.	He	took
out	his	dice	and	smashed	them	on	Sahadeva’s	chariot	wheels,	laughing.
Someone	 hit	 him	 across	 the	 jaw.	 Fists	 punched	 him	 in	 the	 stomach.	 A	 boot
kicked	 him	 in	 the	 groin	 and	 a	 sword	 swiped	 across	 his	 cheek.	 He	 heard
Sahadeva	 say,	 “Not	 so	 quick,	 my	 friends,	 not	 such	 an	 easy	 death	 for	 the
Mlecha.”
“Too	late,	you	bloody	Indians...much	too	late...”	Shakuni	said	before	blackness
overwhelmed	him	completely.
*****

71			WHEEL	OF	DHARMA
	
A	LIGHT	DRIZZLE	WAS	FALLING	when	the	battle	started	in	earnest.	Karna	had	spent	a

sleepless	 night	 tossing	 on	 his	 hard	 bed.	 Bhima’s	 howls	 of	 grief,	 which	 the
breeze	carried	to	the	Kaurava	camp,	had	made	him	restless	and	angry.	It	came
as	 a	 surprise	 to	 him	 that	 Bhima	 cared	 so	 much	 for	 his	 Rakshasa	 son.	 It
somehow	made	his	own	act	all	the	more	cruel,	as	if	he	had	wounded	an	animal.
Karna	had	decided	on	the	vajra	formation	for	a	quick	thrust	into	the	Pandava
ranks.	He	did	not	intend	to	drag	out	the	war.
Where	had	Aswathama	disappeared	to?	He	was	supposed	to	be	here	supporting
him.	The	Brahmin	had	been	behaving	strangely	of	late.	Karna	wished	he	could
tell	 his	 friend	 why	 he	 had	 spared	 the	 other	 Pandavas,	 but...	 “Take	 me	 to
Arjuna,”	he	said	calmly	to	his	charioteer.
Shalya	 grunted	 in	 reply	 and	 the	 chariot	 began	 weaving	 its	 way	 through	 the
Pandava	army	at	great	speed.	For	a	change,	Shalya	was	silent.	Perhaps	Bhima’s
agonizing	cries	had	affected	him	too.
“Hurry,	Shalya.	To	Arjuna...“
“Suta,	 do	 you	 think	 this	 is	 a	 pleasure	 trip	 and	 I	 am	 your	 guide?	 Take	 me	 to
Arjuna;	 take	 me	 to	 Arjuna,	 as	 if	 he	 were	 the	 lover	 you	 are	 dying	 to	 meet.”
Shalya	 laughed	 at	 his	 own	 joke	 and	 veered	 off	 the	 path,	 cutting	 diagonally
across	from	where	they	had	intended	to	go.
“Stop	blabbering	 and...”	Before	Karna	could	complete	his	sentence,	an	arrow
whizzed	past	him.	Shalya	had	swerved	from	its	path	with	matchless	dexterity.
“Watch	out,	Suta.	Without	me,	you	are	a	dead	Suta,”	laughed	Shalya.
“Stop	talking	nonsense	and	take	me	to	Arjuna!”

“Brace	yourself,	 Suta,	 we	are	going	to	 catch	up	with	my	old	friend,	Krishna.
Let	us	see	who	is	the	better	charioteer.”	Shalya	whipped	his	horses,	laughing	in
glee.
At	 breakneck	 speed,	 Karna’s	 chariot	 pierced	 the	 Pandava	 ranks.	 Karna	 began
shooting	 down	 everyone	 in	 his	 path,	 spreading	 panic.	 Krishna	 moved	 away
from	him,	weaving	a	complex	path	to	keep	the	chariot	away	from	his	arrows.
Both	sides	had	suffered	huge	losses	but	with	adequate	supplies	arranged	by	the
Confederate	forces,	the	Pandavas	were	better	able	to	drag	out	the	war.	For	the
Kauravas,	supplies	had	run	out	and	if	Karna	was	unable	to	kill	Arjuna	this	day,
the	writing	was	clear	on	the	wall.
“Faster,	faster...”	Karna	urged.
“You	wish	to	die	of	a	broken	neck?”	asked	Shalya,	his	face	alight	with	the	thrill
of	 the	 chase.	 He	 whipped	 the	 horses	 savagely	 and	 the	 chariot	 veered	 to	 one
side,	almost	toppling	over.	Shalya	slid	to	the	other	side	to	regain	his	balance,
grinning	at	Karna.	“You	almost	had	your	wish.	Want	to	see	any	more	stunts?”
It	was	no	use	talking	to	this	maniac,	thought	Karna.	He	should	have	taken	a	less
skilled	 but	 sane	 charioteer,	 but	 no	 one	 was	 as	 good	 as	 this	 reckless	 genius.
Only	he	could	match	Krishna’s	skill	with	the	reins.	The	chariot	was	weaving	its
way	through	the	Pandava	elephant	corps.	Shalya	leaned	over	and	whipped	one
of	the	elephants.
“What	are	you	doing?”	Karna	yelled	as	the	elephants	began	to	stampede.
“Just	 watch	 the	 fun,”	 Shalya	 laughed,	 weaving	 through	 the	 wall	 of	 pounding
elephant	 legs	 around	 them.	 As	 if	 by	 magic,	 a	 path	 opened	 up	 while	 the
elephants	ran	in	all	directions,	destroying	everything	in	their	way.	Shalya	killed
more	Pandava	soldiers	by	his	dexterous	handling	of	the	chariot	than	Karna	had
done	in	the	entire	day.
“There	 they	 are!”	 Shalya	 pointed	 to	 the	 fast-vanishing	 rear	 of	 a	 chariot.	 The
Hanuman	flag	fluttered	in	the	wind.
The	skies	opened	all	of	a	sudden	and	rain	started	falling	in	a	heavy	downpour.
Some	mounted	archers	cut	in	from	their	right	and	tried	to	slow	down	Karna.

He	 shot	 them	 down	 with	 ease	 but	 Arjuna	 had	 gained	 on	 him	 considerably.
Where	was	the	coward	running	to?
Shalya	halted	the	chariot	abruptly.	“Let	us	go	back.”
“Are	you	crazy?”
“It	is	you	who	are	crazy,	you	ignorant	Suta!	Krishna	is	up	to	his	usual	tricks.
The	ground	is	slippery	here	and	the	wheels	may	sink.	Let	us	catch	them	when
the	ground	is	dry.”
“Don’t	order	me	around,	Shalya.	You	are	my	charioteer	and	I	the	Commanderin-Chief	of	the	Kauravas.	Take	me	to	Arjuna!”
“Your	wish	is	my	command,	most	revered,	most	respected	Chief.”	Shalya	spat
on	the	ground	and	muttered,	“Bloody	Suta!”	The	chariot	raced	on,	chasing	the
Hanuman	flag.
The	 river	 was	 flowing	 swiftly,	 swelled	 by	 the	 downpour.	 Krishna	 drove	 his
chariot	perilously	close	to	the	surging	waters.	Shalya	managed	to	catch	up	with
him	and	for	some	time	the	horses	galloped	on	neck	to	neck.	Krishna	was	calm
and	composed,	as	if	he	was	riding	through	the	streets	of	Hastinapura	instead	of
on	 slippery	 ground.	 Shalya	 hooted,	 taunting	 Krishna	 and	 abusing	 Arjuna	 and
Karna	in	equal	measure.	The	two	warriors	began	shooting	at	each	other.	With
the	wind	screaming	in	his	ears	and	the	rain	lashing	his	face,	Karna	managed	to
wound	Arjuna	twice.	Arjuna	scarred	Karna’s	forehead.	It	was	difficult	to	keep
their	 bows	 steady	 in	 the	 wind	 and	 rain.	 The	 chariots	 jerked	 and	 rolled	 in	 the
slushy	mud.	The	roar	of	the	river	frightened	the	neighing	horses.
Inch	by	inch,	Krishna	started	gaining	on	Shalya.	With	a	jerk,	Arjuna’s	chariot
zoomed	past.	Shalya	was	slowing	down	again.	What	was	wrong	with	the	man?
Karna	was	livid.	Was	he	fighting	for	him	or	the	Pandavas?
“He	 will	 turn	 now	 and	 face	 you.	 Brace	 for	 Arjuna’s	 arrow,”	 Shalya	 said,	 his
voice	quiet	and	sombre	for	once.
As	 predicted,	 Krishna	 executed	 a	 sharp	 turn,	 with	 inches	 to	 spare	 from	 the
river,	 as	 mud	 spattered	 into	 the	 water.	 Shalya	 veered	 left	 and	 Karna	 thought
they	would	fall.	A	flaming	arrow	whistled	past,	a	hair ’s	breadth	away	from	the

chariot.	 Karna	 shot	 back	 but	 missed	 Arjuna.	 Krishna	 had	 handled	 his	 chariot
with	remarkable	skill.	He	and	Shalya	were	fighting	their	own	battle.
Krishna’s	 chariot	 tilted	 at	 a	 crazy	 angle.	 Arjuna’s	 figure	 loomed	 large	 and
Karna	could	see	the	unflinching	concentration	in	his	face.	Another	arrow	came
hissing	at	him	but	Karna	ducked	it.	He	instantly	shot	back	at	Arjuna	but	missed.
Krishna’s	prowess	in	steering	the	chariot	was	remarkable.
“Use	your	ageneya	now,	Suta.	Aim	at	his	chest	or	waist.	You	will	miss	if	you
go	for	the	throat,”	Shalya	advised.
“Are	you	now	my	archery	Guru?”	Karna	snapped.
Shalya	 hooted	 with	 laughter	 and	 wished	 Karna	 death.	 Cursing,	 Karna	 began
loading	the	ageneya	in	the	yantra,	winding	it	up.	The	rain	 had	become	fierce
and	 the	 wind	 pushed	 them	 back.	 The	 chariots	 circled	 each	 other	 at	 speed,
churning	 mud.	 Karna	 feared	 his	 chariot	 would	 fall	 apart.	 His	 maverick
charioteer	 was	 driving	 the	 horses	 crazy	 with	 his	 shrieks,	 whip	 and	 stunts.
Shalya	ducked	from	arrows	or	hung	out	of	his	seat	with	one	hand.	He	prodded
the	horses	with	kicks,	jumping	out	to	run	alongside	and	then	climbing	back	to
do	 more	 terrifying	 stunts.	 His	 unceasing	 jeers	 and	 chatter	 began	 to	 affect
Karna’s	concentration.
“I	will	turn	 the	chariot	to	face	 him.	Use	your	ageneya.”	 Shalya	 veered	 to	 the
right	 at	 the	 most	 unexpected	 moment,	 catching	 Krishna	 by	 surprise.	 Shalya
circled	 Krishna’s	 chariot	 and	 cut	 across	 unexpectedly.	 Karna	 could	 see	 the
frothing	river	as	Shalya	drove	straight	towards	it.	“Turn	and	shoot	at	his	chest,
or	you	will	miss,”	Shalya	screamed	against	the	wind,	standing	up	in	his	seat	to
crack	his	whip.
Karna	 let	 loose	 the	 ageneya.	 The	 fiery	 astra	 shot	 towards	 Arjuna’s	 throat.
Karna	felt	elated.	There	was	no	way	Arjuna	could	escape.
“Fool!	 Fool!	 Fool!”	 Shalya	 screamed	 as	 he	 pulled	 at	 the	 reins	 to	 turn	 the
chariot.
When	Karna	looked	back,	he	was	horrified.	Krishna	had	driven	his	chariot	into
a	ditch	to	evade	the	astra’s	path.	His	horses	were	neighing	in	fear,	their	front

legs	thrashing	in	the	air.	Arjuna’s	chariot	wheels	were	stuck	deep	in	the	mud.
Shalya	 had	 been	 right.	 He	 would	 not	 have	 missed	 had	 he	 aimed	 for	 Arjuna’s
chest.	He	heard	the	muted	explosion	of	the	ageneya	in	the	distance.
“We	have	them	trapped.	Use	your	nagastra	fast,”	Shalya	urged.
“No.	It	is	against	dharma	to	shoot	when	their	chariot	is	stuck.”
“What?	 What	 did	 you	 blabber,	 Suta?	 You	 kill	 him	 now	 or	 you	 will	 die	 at
Arjuna’s	hands.”
“It	would	be	dishonourable.”
“Is	 this	 the	 time	 to	 turn	 noble?	 I	 refuse	 to	 risk	 my	 life	 for	 an	 idiot.”	 Shalya
jumped	out	of	the	chariot	and	began	walking	away.
“Hey!	 Where	 are	 you	 going?	 You	 cannot	 leave	 me	 like	 this	 at	 such	 a	 crucial
moment!”
Shalya	 walked	 on	 without	 a	 word,	 not	 bothering	 to	 turn	 to	 look	 at	 Karna.
Lightning	 cracked	 open	 the	 sky	 and	 struck	 a	 tree.	 The	 river	 had	 started
climbing	up	its	banks.	It	was	as	if	the	rain	God	was	trying	to	make	up	for	his
years	of	absence	in	a	single	day.
Karna	took	the	reins.	He	knew	he	could	not	match	Krishna’s	charioting	skills
and	 Arjuna’s	 archery	 skills	 by	 himself.	 His	 unlucky	 stars	 were	 haunting	 him
again.	 He	 had	 a	 choice.	 To	 shoot	 Arjuna	 before	 Krishna	 could	 extract	 the
chariot	 from	 the	 mud	 would	 have	 been	 child’s	 play.	 He	 toyed	 with	 the	 idea.
Then	the	image	of	his	other	great	foe,	Uthayan,	waiting	for	him	to	extract	his
stuck	chariot	wheels	on	the	banks	of	the	Narmada	flashed	into	his	mind.	No,	he
could	not	do	it.	No	honourable	warrior	could.	He	waited.
Krishna	managed	to	extricate	the	chariot.	It	was	getting	dark.	The	roar	of	the
Ganga	 had	 become	 deafening.	 Karna	 could	 see	 the	 Kaurava	 army	 rushing	 to
rescue	him.	Krishna	had	trapped	him	by	moving	away	from	the	battlefield	and
like	 a	 fool,	 he	 had	 given	 chase.	 Arjuna’s	 face	 became	 clearer	 as	 his	 chariot
approached	 at	 great	 speed.	 Karna	 saw	 hesitation	 in	 those	 eyes.	 Karna	 had	 no
charioteer	and	according	to	the	ethics	of	war,	Krishna	had	to	get	down	to	make
things	equal.	It	seemed	that	Arjuna	was	arguing	with	Krishna.

Karna	 pulled	 at	 the	 reins	 with	 one	 hand,	 holding	 his	 arrow	 in	 place	 with	 his
teeth.	 The	 chariot	 pitched	 and	 jerked	 in	 the	 mud.	 When	 he	 felt	 he	 was	 in
position,	he	shot	at	Arjuna.	Karna	saw	Krishna’s	face	light	up	with	a	smile.	The
arrow	had	struck	Arjuna’s	shoulder.	That	ended	Arjuna’s	dilemma.	Karna	had
indicated	 his	 willingness	 to	 fight	 without	 a	 charioteer.	 He	 would	 not	 ask	 for
any	 favours	 from	 Arjuna,	 not	 after	 a	 lifetime	 of	 insults	 and	 jeers,	 and	 never
from	the	man	who	had	taken	the	woman	he	had	loved.	No,	this	Suta	was	more
Kshatriya	than	anyone	else.
Karna	took	aim	but	as	he	did	so,	his	chariot	stopped	–	the	wheels	had	become
stuck	in	the	mud.	There	was	no	other	way	but	to	get	down	and	extricate	them,
just	as	Krishna	had	done	a	while	before.	Swallowing,	Karna	called	out,	“Halt
there,	Arjuna!	My	wheel	is	stuck.	I	ask	you	to	wait	till	I	get	my	chariot	out.”
Arjuna’s	raised	bow	came	down	and	Karna	jumped	into	the	slush.	Putting	his
shoulder	to	the	wheel,	he	started	pushing.
“What	are	you	waiting	for?	Shoot	the	Suta!”	Krishna	said,	pointing.
“No,	Krishna.	He	is	unarmed.	It	would	not	be	fair.”
“Would	not	be	fair?	Does	the	man	deserve	fairness?	Have	you	forgotten	how
he	 insulted	 Draupadi	 in	 the	 Sabha?	 Have	 you	 forgotten	 how	 he	 killed
Abhimanyu?	Shoot	him	now!”
“Krishna...I	cannot.	It	would	be	dishonourable.”
“This	is	your	last	chance.	Look	to	your	right.	The	Kaurava	army	has	arrived.
Kill	him	and	we	stand	a	chance	of	escaping	in	the	confusion	that	will	follow.”
Arjuna	 raised	 his	 bow	 and	 aimed	 at	 Karna’s	 throat.	 Karna	 looked	 up.	 Surely
Arjuna	 was	 just	 posturing?	 No	 warrior	 possessed	 of	 even	 a	 modicum	 of
honour	 would	 shoot	 a	 man	 like	 this.	 Karna	 put	 his	 entire	 weight	 against	 the
chariot,	raising	it	little	by	little.
Arjuna’s	arrow	pierced	Karna’s	throat,	pinning	him	to	the	chariot	wheel.	Karna
knew	it	was	over.	Shalya	had	been	right,	he	should	have	taken	the	opportunity
when	 it	 had	 come.	 But	 then	 he	 would	 have	 been	 like	 Arjuna,	 another	 puppet,
another	Kaunteya.	He	was	Karna,	son	of	a	poor	Suta,	a	proud	Radheya,	and	he

would	die	that	way.	He	saw	Suyodhana	jump	down	from	his	chariot,	lose	his
balance,	fall,	get	up	again	and	rush	towards	him.	The	entire	Kaurava	army	was
running	towards	their	fallen	Commander.	In	the	confusion,	Karna	saw	Krishna
turn	his	chariot	and	vanish	from	the	scene.	Arjuna	never	looked	back.
Karna	could	feel	Suyodhana’s	arms	around	him	but	darkness	was	falling	fast.
The	rain	on	his	unarmoured	skin	felt	like	needles	of	fire.	He	could	faintly	hear
his	 friend	 talking	 to	 him.	 Karna	 wanted	 to	 thank	 him	 for	 everything	 he	 had
done,	 for	 standing	 up	 for	 him	 when	 no	 one	 else	 would,	 for	 the	 many	 things,
big	and	small,	that	only	a	friend	would	understand.
Karna	felt	Aswathama’s	hand	grip	his	own.	He	heard	Suyodhana	accusing	him
of	 not	 being	 there	 to	 support	 Karna	 when	 it	 had	 mattered.	 “I	 thought	 Karna
would	 be	 safe.	 Look	 at	 me,	 Suyodhana,	 I	 am	 bleeding	 from	 a	 hundred	 cuts.
I….I	 am	 sorry	 I	 was	 late,”	 the	 Brahmin	 cried,	 guilt	 struggling	 with	 denial	 at
what	he	saw.
Had	his	friend	not	called	him	a	traitor?	‘But	I	am	not	a	traitor,	Aswathama,	and
neither	are	you,	my	friend,’	thought	Karna	wearily.	‘Suyodhana,	do	not	blame
Aswathama.	 He	 had	 his	 own	 reasons	 for	 not	 being	 there.	 Look	 at	 his	 body	 –
every	 inch	 covered	 with	 wounds.	 Aswathama	 do	 not	 go	 away!	 I	 forgive	 you,
my	friend,	and	you	must	forgive	Suyodhana	for	his	harsh	words.	Do	not	leave
me	now.	Stay	with	me	for	a	few	 moments	more,’	Karna	wanted	to	cry	out	to
Aswathama	 who	 was	 dragging	 himself	 away,	 but	 he	 could	 not	 speak;	 he	 was
drowning	in	his	own	blood.
‘My	friend,	I	do	not	want	the	empire	Krishna	offered	me.	If	anyone	deserves	it,
it	is	you,	Suyodhana.	You	gave	your	unconditional	love	without	asking	about
my	caste	when	the	whole	world	shunned	me.	I	could	not	win	the	war	for	you,
dear	 friend.’	 Garbled	 words	 came	 from	 Karna’s	 mouth,	 meaningless	 and
useless.	But	no	words	were	necessary.	Their	friendship	went	far	beyond	words.
An	arrow	shot	at	an	unarmed	man	could	not	destroy	it.	Suyodhana	pressed	his
friend	to	his	bosom,	his	tears	washed	away	by	the	tears	of	heaven.
Karna,	the	man	whose	life	the	Gods	were	fond	of	playing	dice	with;	the	man
who	had	chosen	to	remain	a	low-class	Suta	when	an	empire	was	offered	to	him
on	a	platter,	died	in	his	friend’s	arms.	The	war	lost	all	meaning	for	Suyodhana.

*****

72			THE	KILL
	
WHEN	HE	LEARNED	AFTER	KARNA’S	DEATH	that	Shalya	had	abandoned	his	friend	at

the	most	critical	juncture,	Suyodhana	ordered	Shalya	hunted	down	and	killed.
In	the	small	hours	of	the	eighteenth	day	of	the	war,	as	Suyodhana	lay	tossing	in
his	 bed,	 he	 sensed	 a	 presence	 in	 his	 tent.	 He	 sprang	 up,	 his	 warrior	 instincts
alert	to	the	presence	of	an	intruder	in	his	camp.
A	figure	stood	in	the	shadows,	head	bent.	“Suyodhana,	it	is	I,	Shalya.	Forgive
me	for	what	I	have	done.”
Grabbing	 his	 sword,	 Suyodhana	 rushed	 at	 the	 traitor,	 but	 Shalya	 said,	 “You
have	every	right	to	kill	me.	I	was	a	traitor	in	your	camp	for	I	hated	the	Suta.	My
ego	was	hurt	when	you	made	me	the	Suta’s	charioteer.	I	wanted	Karna	to	fail,
and	 discouraged	 him	 with	 my	 harsh	 words.	 All	 night	 I	 hid	 in	 the	 jungles
beyond	Kurukshetra,	thinking	about	the	rights	and	wrongs	of	the	war.	I	know	I
was	 responsible	 for	 the	 death	 of	 the	 noblest	 of	 men.	 It	 did	 not	 matter	 that	 he
was	a	Suta.	What	I	did	is	hurting	me	like	a	dagger	in	my	heart.	I	came	to	beg
for	your	forgiveness,	a	chance	to	redeem	myself.	I	am	a	maharathi	and	a	better
warrior	than	all	the	Pandavas.	I	shall	defeat	them	for	you,	for	the	man	I	cheated.
I	shall	kill	Krishna	and	Arjuna	today	if	you	will	let	me	fight	for	you.	But	if	you
prefer	to	hang	me	for	treason,	I	am	ready	for	that,	too.”
Suyodhana	 shouted	 for	 the	 guards	 to	 tie	 up	 Shalya.	 The	 maverick	 had
surrendered	without	protest.	Suyodhana	was	unable	to	decide	whether	to	trust
the	blackguard	or	not.	Finally,	when	dawn	was	breaking,	he	walked	to	Kripa’s
camp	and	sought	his	advice.	The	Acharya	said	they	were	at	a	stage	when	they
should	accept	anyone	willing	to	help	them.	The	situation	was	desperate.	Only	a
few	warriors	remained.	If	he	was	to	make	good	of	the	situation,	it	was	best	to
make	 Shalya	 the	 Commander-in-Chief.	 Suyodhana	 consulted	 Aswathama	 and
Sushasana	 and	 they,	 too,	 were	 of	 the	 opinion	 that	 none	 was	 equal	 to	 the
maverick	Shalya	in	warfare	and	strategy,	provided	he	bent	his	sharp	mind	to	it.

Just	before	battle	resumed	on	the	eighteenth	day,	Suyodhana	freed	Shalya	and
appointed	 him	 Commander-in-Chief	 of	 the	 Kaurava	 armies.	 Shalya	 bowed	 to
Suyodhana	and	assumed	charge.	Kripa	watched,	an	amused	smile	on	his	face,
as	the	new	Commander	called	for	a	strategy	meeting.	The	first	thing	he	did	was
to	ensure	there	was	no	hand-to-hand	combat	or	individual	duels.	They	had	to
attack	 as	 a	 united	 front;	 they	 would	 break	 the	 rules	 and	 form	 unconventional
formations	 that	 weren’t	 in	 any	 book	 on	 warfare.	 Only	 winning	 counted,
winning	was	dharma,	the	new	Commander	exhorted	his	troops.	Suyodhana	felt
uneasy,	but	he	had	no	choice.
The	first	half	of	the	eighteenth	day	saw	the	bloodiest	slaughter.	Shalya	attacked
aggressively,	 defeating	 Bhima,	 Nakula	 and	 Sahadeva,	 causing	 them	 to	 retreat
hastily	with	their	troops.	His	aim	was	to	corner	Krishna	and	then	kill	both	him
and	Arjuna.	By	the	time	the	sun	was	a	hot	ball	of	fire	over	their	heads	and	the
shadows	were	short	dwarfs	running	under	their	feet.	Shalya	had	demolished	the
last	 of	 the	 Pandava	 resistance.	 He	 tied	 spikes	 and	 lances	 to	 the	 wheels	 of	 the
chariots	and	raced	through	the	enemy	battalions,	cutting	down	horses,	making
elephants	panic	and	using	lethal	powders.	Poisonous	arrows	and	oil	pots	flew
fast	 and	 furious,	 creating	 orbs	 of	 fire.	 The	 Pandava	 situation	 was	 becoming
hopeless.	Yudhishtra	was	overcome	by	despair.
Krishna	 manoeuvered	 his	 chariot	 to	 reach	 Yudhishtra	 and	 told	 him	 that	 he
would	 create	 a	 diversion	 but	 that	 Yudhishtra	 would	 have	 to	 act	 quickly.	 He
would	tempt	Shalya	to	follow	him	in	his	chariot	and	Yudhishtra	would	then	use
his	lance	to	strike	him	down	from	behind.
Horrified,	 Yudhishtra	 protested	 that	 he	 would	 do	 no	 such	 thing.	 He	 had	 not
killed	anyone	in	the	war;	others	had	done	the	butchering	for	him.	“Krishna,	I
cannot	 take	 anyone’s	 life,	 even	 my	 enemy’s.	 Life	 has	 taught	 me	 many	 things
and	…”
“Brother,	you	want	us	to	kill	for	you	while	you	yourself	will	not	lift	your	little
finger?	 Talk	 of	 ahimsa	 on	 the	 battlefield	 are	 the	 words	 of	 a	 coward.	 Do	 as
Krishna	says,	or	else	we	are	doomed.	You	are	a	Kshatriya.	We	are	fighting	to
make	you	King,”	Arjuna	snapped.
“But	Shalya	is	our	uncle,	the	brother	of	our	step-mother,	Madri.”

“He	 is	 our	 enemy	 now.	 I	 killed	 Pitamaha;	 I	 killed	 our	 beloved	 Guru	 for	 you.
Everyone	 we	 are	 fighting	 is	 kin,	 including	 Duryodhana.	 This	 is	 war,	 brother.
Do	 your	 duty,	 or	 else	 adharma	 will	 triumph,”	 Arjuna	 said,	 his	 eyes	 never
leaving	his	brother ’s	face.	Krishna	smiled.
Before	Yudhishtra	could	react,	Krishna’s	chariot	had	vanished	into	the	thick	of
battle,	 rushing	 headlong	 towards	 the	 Kaurava	 Commander.	 Yudhishtra	 waited
with	a	heavy	heart	for	it	to	return,	with	Shalya	in	chase.	The	lance	felt	heavy	in
his	hand.
Soon,	 an	 uproar	 was	 heard	 and	 dust	 rose	 to	 cloud	 the	 sun.	 Men	 and	 chariots
came	rushing	towards	Yudhishtra.	Krishna’s	chariot	flew	past	him	in	a	blur	and
he	heard	Krishna	shout,	“Now!”	Yudhishtra	closed	his	eyes	and	threw	his	lance
with	full	force	at	the	chariot	chasing	Krishna	and	Arjuna.	He	opened	his	eyes
when	 he	 heard	 the	 shouts	 of	 jubilation	 around	 him.	 ‘Maharaja	 Yudhishtra
Vijaya!’	his	soldiers	were	shouting.
In	the	chariot	that	had	toppled	over,	Shalya	lay	dead,	a	lance	through	his	heart.
His	 accusing	 gaze	 pierced	 Yudhishtra’s	 heart,	 sharper	 than	 the	 lance	 he	 had
hurled	at	his	uncle.	Yudhishtra	collapsed	in	his	chariot,	his	hands	shivering.	He
had	 killed	 his	 uncle,	 that	 too,	 by	 attacking	 from	 the	 rear.	 He	 had	 thrown	 his
lance	 at	 the	 back	 of	 the	 Kaurava	 Commander...like	 a	 coward...	 a	 man	 with	 no
honour.	 It	 was	 amoral,	 adharmic...	 Suddenly	 he	 remembered	 the	 Nishada
woman	and	her	five	children	in
Varanavata.	His	mother	had	told	him	they	had	to	do	it	to	save	themselves.	Now
he	 was	 a	 man	 in	 his	 prime	 and	 life	 had	 taught	 him	 that	 nothing	 good	 could
come	 from	 violence.	 But	 he	 felt	 as	 helpless	 as	 a	 twig	 caught	 in	 a	 flood.	 He
could	smell	the	blood	on	his	hands,	the	blood	of	his	kin,	the	blood	of	men	he
had	once	respected	and	loved.
“I	will	go	and	finish	Dushasana	and	Duryodhana,”	he	heard	Bhima	say.
Victory	was	at	hand,	but	it	failed	to	cheer	the	son	of	dharma.
*****

73			THE	LAKE
	
HE	HAD	FAILED	THEM	ALL.	He	was	a	despicable	creature.	He	had	kept	hope	alive

till	Shalya	fell.	Now	there	was	nothing	left.	Suyodhana’s	teeth	chattered	as	he
lay	submerged	in	the	icy	Samanthapanchaka	lake.	It	was	bone-chilling	cold	but
nothing	 could	 soothe	 the	 burning	 inside	 him.	 He	 had	 stayed	 in	 the	 lake	 the
whole	 night,	 trying	 to	 shake	 off	 the	 smiling	 image	 of	 Karna.	 Kumara’s
innocent	 face	 haunted	 him.	 No,	 he	 could	 not	 give	 up.	 This	 was	 a	 strategic
retreat.	He	needed	time	to	think.	He	had	to	live	somehow	to	fight	another	day.	If
he	dug	deep	into	himself,	surely	he	would	find	the	courage?	The	Pandavas	had
broken	every	rule	of	war,	yet	they	had	won.	No,	the	war	was	not	over	yet,	and
never	would	be,	until	dharma	was	restored.	It	would	continue	with	or	without
him.
Who	 was	 that?	 Suyodhana	 heard	 a	 twig	 snap.	 Had	 they	 found	 him?	 His	 mace
lay	half-buried	on	the	slushy	shore.	He	was	not	sure	he	even	had	the	strength	to
lift	it,	let	alone	fight	with	it.
“Get	out	of	there,	you	fool!	They	will	find	and	kill	you.”
Acharya	 Kripa!	 Suyodhana	 lifted	 his	 head	 from	 the	 water.	 Two	 figures	 stood
behind	 Kripa.	 One	 was	 the	 Yadava	 Commander,	 Kritavarma,	 and	 the	 other
was...
“Suyodhana,	I	have	failed	you.	I	failed	Karna,”	said	Aswathama.	Suyodhana	did
not	want	to	face	him.	“Suyodhana,	Bhima	killed	Sushasana	a	short	while	ago.
Your	brother	fought	to	the	last.	Bhima	downed	him	with	a	kick	to	the	groin.	He
tore	Sushasana’s	arm	from	his	shoulder.	When	Sushasana	raised	his	other	arm
in	defiance,	Bhima	cut	off	both	his	hands.	Still,	Sushasana	did	not	utter	a	cry	of
pain.	 He	 spat	 in	 Bhima’s	 face	 and	 laughed	 at	 him.	 Can	 you	 believe	 that?
Enraged,	 Bhima	 tore	 open	 Sushasana’s	 chest	 and	 drank	 his	 blood.	 Then
Draupadi,	too,	came	to	drink	Sushasana’s	blood.	The	rage	that	woman	carried

within	her!	She	finally	bound	her	hair	after	thirteen	years,	having	first	dipped	it
in	your	brother ’s	blood.	She	could	not	stop	laughing.”
“Enough,	Aswathama!”	snapped	Kripa.
“They	 killed	 Karna	 when	 he	 was	 helpless.	 They	 killed	 my	 father	 with	 a	 lie.
They	killed	Bhishma	through	deceit.	They	killed	Sushasana	with	a	foul	kick...
should	we	allow	them	to	win	after	all	this?	If	they	win,	no	one	will	ever	believe
in	dharma	again.”
“Aswathama,	 my	 friend,	 get	 away	 from	 here.	 Run	 as	 fast	 as	 your	 legs	 will
carry	 you.	 Save	 yourself	 to	 fight	 another	 day.	 Carry	 the	 flag	 for	 all	 of	 us,”
Suyodhana	said,	looking	into	the	distance	where	the	sky	dissolved	into	the	lake.
“Can’t	you	hear	the	victory	celebrations	from	their	camp?	Bhishma	still	waits
for	 death	 on	 his	 bed	 of	 arrows,	 but	 they	 do	 not	 care.	 Mercifully,	 everything
will	be	over	soon.”
“Kritavarma	and	Aswathama	want	revenge.	I	have	been	trying	to	talk	sense	into
them.	 Nothing	 good	 will	 come	 of	 such	 foolishness,”	 Kripa	 said	 with	 utter
certainty.
“The	celebrations	in	the	Pandava	camp	will	not	last	long,”	vowed	Aswathama,
gritting	his	teeth.
“Suyodhana,	this	rash	fool	will	not	listen	to	me,”	Kripa	said.
“Aswathama,	they	will	not	treat	you	harshly.	You	are	a	Brahmin	and	they	know
what	they	did	to	your	father.	I	have	to	fight	to	the	end	but	you	must	survive,	for
all	of	us,	for	dharma	to	win,”	Suyodhana	said	to	his	friend.
“So	you	think	I	should	become	their	Rajaguru,	like	my	father?	You	think	they
will	spare	me	because	I	am	a	Brahmin?	Do	you	really	think	I	want	to	lead	such
a	life	after	what	they	have	done	to	you,	to	Karna,	to	countless	others?”
Suyodhana	wanted	to	tell	Aswathama	to	leave	the	past	behind,	but	the	bitterness
in	 his	 heart	 refused	 to	 go	 away.	 It	 was	 through	 a	 travesty	 of	 justice	 that	 the
Pandavas	 had	 won	 the	 war	 and	 he	 was	 hiding	 like	 a	 water	 rat.	 Suyodhana
scooped	 up	 some	 water	 and	 looked	 at	 Aswathama.	 His	 friend	 waded	 into	 the
water	 and	 stood	 before	 him.	 The	 image	 of	 the	 wispy	 Brahmin	 boy	 whom	 he

had	 saved	 from	 Bhima	 years	 before	 rushed	 to	 his	 mind,	 choking	 him	 with
tears.
Perhaps	 Aswathama	 was	 remembering	 the	 same	 thing	 for	 he	 said	 with	 a
crooked	smile,	“That	mango	you	gave	me	years	ago...”
“You	never	got	to	eat	it,	though.	Ekalavya	snatched	it	from	you.”	They	laughed.
The	mention	of	Ekalavya	brought	back	bitter	memories.	No,	it	was	not	justice
that	 the	 Pandavas	 had	 won	 everything.	 Suyodhana	 poured	 the	 water	 over
Aswathama	saying,	“I	appoint	you	Commander-in-Chief	of	the	Kaurava	army.
Vijayi	Bhava!”
Kripa	snorted.	“A	Commander-in-Chief	of	an	army	of	three!”
Aswathama	 hugged	 Suyodhana.	 “Don’t	 hate	 me	 when	 you	 hear	 what	 I	 have
done.”
“I	will	be	dead	by	then,	my	friend.	But	you	still	have	a	chance	to	go	back	and
claim	the	exalted	life	of	a	Rajaguru.”
Aswathama	dunked	under	the	water	and	stayed	there	for	some	time.	When	he
emerged,	the	sun	was	rising	out	of	the	blood-red	lake.	The	Brahmin	took	water
in	his	trembling	palms	and	recited	the	holy	Gayatri	mantra.	Mist	rolled	down
from	the	distant	hills	and	countless	birds	swooped	around	in	the	rushes	by	the
lake.	It	was	a	beautiful	day.	A	good	day	to	die.
Suyodhana	 closed	 his	 eyes	 as	 Aswathama	 touched	 his	 shoulder.	 He	 heard	 the
splash	of	water	as	his	friend	climbed	out	onto	dry	land.	A	cold	breeze	carrying
the	 stench	 of	 blood	 and	 decaying	 flesh	 from	 the	 battlefield	 caressed	 him.	 He
thought	of	the	patriarch	still	lying	on	his	tortuous	bed	of	arrows,	waiting	for
the	spring	solstice,	waiting	to	die.	‘Forgive	me,	Pitamaha,	I	never	knew	your
worth	when	it	mattered,’	thought	Suyodhana.	In	his	mind,	he	was	still	the	little
boy	who	had	sat	on	Pitamaha’s	lap,	embarrassed	to	kiss	the	old	man	in	public.
The	 bristle	 of	 his	 beard,	 the	 smell	 of	 the	 sandalwood	 paste	 on	 Bhishma’s
forehead	–	a	thousand	memories...priceless...useless.
“There	he	is!”
Suyodhana	prayed	for	courage.	They	had	found	him.	He	opened	his	eyes	to	see

Krishna	sitting	in	his	charioteer ’s	seat,	caressing	his	whip	and	smiling	at	him.
How	he	wished	he	could	have	wiped	that	smirk	off	the	Yadava’s	face.	Behind
him	stood	his	enemies,	smug	in	victory.	No,	not	all	of	them.	A	shade	of	distress
clouded	Yudhishtra’s	eyes	and	Arjuna’s	brow	was	furrowed	with	worry.	Why
did	he	not	get	down	from	his	chariot?	Suyodhana	could	hear	people	rushing	in
from	 all	 sides.	 Drummers	 came	 running,	 preparing	 for	 a	 bloody	 show.
Overcome	by	sorrow	and	pain,	Suyodhana	watched	his	subjects	jostle	and	push
each	other	to	watch	him	die.	Some	looked	sad	but	most	of	them	seemed	excited
to	be	present	at	the	kill.	Nothing	was	more	entertaining	than	the	fall	of	a	great
man.
The	 crowd	 parted	 for	 Dhaumya.	 “Come	 out	 of	 the	 water,	 you	 coward!”
Dhaumya	drove	his	staff	into	the	slushy	earth	and	the	crowd	cheered.
Suyodhana	raised	his	head,	his	eyes	blazing	with	their	old	fire.	Dhaumya	took
a	step	back,	trying	to	free	his	staff	from	the	mud.	Suyodhana	came	out	of	the
water,	 tying	 his	 hair	 into	 a	 topknot.	 He	 shook	 the	 water	 from	 his	 body	 and
slapped	 his	 thighs.	 Dhaumya	 disappeared	 into	 the	 crowd,	 leaving	 his	 staff	 of
office	behind.	As	Suyodhana	bent	to	touch	the	ground	and	say	a	silent	prayer,
the	crowd	fell	silent.	He	picked	up	his	mace	from	the	mud,	wiped	it	clean	and
placing	it	on	his	shoulder,	walked	up	to	drier	ground.	On	the	way,	he	crushed
Dhaumya’s	staff	like	a	twig.
Thunder	clapped	overhead	and	dark	clouds	swirled	from	the	southern	horizon.
The	wind	howled,	snapping	the	gnarled	branches	off	dried	trees.	Huge	waves
from	the	lake	smashed	against	the	rocks	on	shore	and	shattered	like	dreams.	A
surge	of	water	rushed	ashore,	hugged	Suyodhana’s	legs	and	then	returned	to	its
cold	abode	in	the	lake.	Like	the	tears	of	heavens,	drops	of	rain	began	to	fall.
The	 parched	 earth,	 drunk	 with	 blood	 for	 eighteen	 days,	 drank	 the	 cleansing
rain	like	a	thirsty	beast.
The	 panicked	 cry	 of	 an	 owl	 filled	 the	 air.	 Suyodhana	 looked	 up	 and	 saw	 a
group	of	crows	chasing	it.	Bad	omens!	But	he	had	arrived	at	a	point	where	he
no	longer	cared	about	omens,	good	or	bad...or	anything	else.	Suyodhana	stood
with	his	heavy	mace	on	his	shoulder,	waiting	for	any	of	the	Pandavas	to	make
the	first	move.
*****

74 			OORUBHANGA
	
“WHY	NOT	SURRENDER,	DURYODHANA?”	Krishna	asked.

Suyodhana	neither	looked	at	Krishna	nor	responded	to	him.
“Surrender,	and	we	shall	spare	your	life.	We	may	even	give	you	a	vassal	state
to	rule.	You	surely	know	your	time	is	done.”
Suyodhana	 ignored	 Krishna	 and	 stood	 staring	 at	 Yudhishtra.	 “Who	 is	 first?	 I
can	 also	 take	 on	 all	 five	 of	 you	 together.”	 If	 his	 cousin	 had	 expected	 him	 to
plead	for	peace	and	accept	his	suzerainty,	he	was	living	in	his	own	fantasy.	An
owl	 fluttered	 above,	 blinded	 by	 daylight,	 struggling	 to	 reach	 the	 darkness	 of
the	forest.	Somewhere,	a	dog	howled.
“Choose	 one	 among	 us.	 If	 you	 win,	 the	 throne	 of	 Hastinapura	 is	 yours,”
Yudhishtra	said.	The	son	of	dharma	had	gambled	again.
Suyodhana	 could	 not	 help	 smiling	 when	 he	 saw	 the	 expression	 on	 Krishna’s
face.	Destiny	was	giving	him	one	more	chance.	He	walked	up	to	Yudhishtra	and
gazed	 at	 him	 from	 head	 to	 toe.	 It	 would	 have	 been	 a	 simple	 matter	 to	 pick
Yudhishtra	for	a	duel	with	maces	and	smash	his	head	to	pieces.	He	moved	on	to
Arjuna’s	 chariot	 and	 said	 clearly,	 “Karna...Drona...Bhishma...”	 Arjuna	 turned
away,	ashamed.	The	twins,	Nakul	and	Sahadeva,	blessed	with	perpetual	boyish
good	 looks,	 stood	 straight	 as	 arrows	 under	 Suyodhana’s	 gaze.	 ‘Men	 who
refused	to	grow	up,’	he	thought	as	he	turned	away.	‘Tchaw!’
“I	choose	Bhima,”	Suyodhana	said.	The	tension	eased	out	of	Krishna’s	face.	It
was	 a	 duel	 Suyodhana	 had	 always	 yearned	 to	 fight,	 a	 childhood	 dream
nourished	from	the	time	he	had	hidden	under	his	blind	father ’s	bed,	quivering
in	fear	of	his	hefty	cousin.
‘Bhanu,	 Karna,	 Aswathama...	 strengthen	 my	 arms.’	 The	 crowd	 parted	 as

Suyodhana	moved	to	the	centre.	It	was	silent	except	for	the	chirping	of	birds.
Bhima	picked	up	his	mace	and	walked	forward	to	face	Suyodhana.	“Kill	him,
Bhima!	 Kill	 the	 devil!”	 Draupadi’s	 voice	 rose	 into	 the	 air	 like	 a	 shrill	 chant.
The	crowd	roared	with	excitement	and	the	drums	began	to	beat.
Bhima	 charged	 like	 an	 elephant.	 Suyodhana	 ducked	 at	 the	 last	 moment	 and
Bhima	 lost	 his	 balance.	 Suyodhana’s	 mace	 connected	 with	 Bhima’s	 shoulder,
drawing	 admiration	 from	 the	 crowd.	 Bhima	 spun	 around	 and	 hit	 back.
Suyodhana	 blocked	 him.	 The	 power	 of	 Bhima’s	 mace	 was	 shocking.
Suyodhana	countered	Bhima’s	brute	strength	with	agility.	Bhima	brought	down
his	mace	again	and	again,	smashing	the	ground.	Suyodhana	dodged	and	danced
back,	landing	powerful	hits	on	Bhima’s	shoulders	and	chest.	In	excitement,	the
frenzied	crowd	began	calling	each	warrior ’s	name	in	turn,	urging	each	one	to
kill	 the	 other...smash	 the	 head,	 crush	 the	 chest	 and	 batter	 the	 face.	 The
drumming	rose	to	a	deafening	pitch.
In	 time,	 both	 warriors	 began	 to	 show	 signs	 of	 fatigue	 but	 neither	 gave	 up.
Suyodhana’s	hits	started	to	affect	Bhima.	There	was	no	doubt	in	the	spectators’
minds	 about	 who	 was	 the	 more	 skilful	 and	 who	 the	 stronger.	 Skill	 against
power,	agility	against	force,	the	duel	raged	on	as	though	there	was	no	end.
The	 chance	 came	 when	 Bhima	 stumbled.	 Suyodhana	 rushed	 in	 to	 smash
Bhima’s	 head.	 From	 the	 corner	 of	 his	 eye,	 he	 saw	 Krishna	 tapping	 his	 thigh
with	 his	 flute.	 What	 trick	 did	 the	 Yadava	 hide	 behind	 his	 smile?	 The	 answer
came	 as	 binding	 pain	 shot	 through	 his	 thigh.	 Suyodhana	 staggered	 and	 fell.
Bhima	had	hit	him	below	the	waist,	against	all	rules	of	duelling,	and	shattered
his	thigh.	Suyodhana	collapsed	onto	the	ground	in	pain	and	anger.	Treachery!
Deceit!	Bastard!
An	 uneasy	 silence	 fell	 on	 the	 crowd.	 They	 had	 all	 seen	 the	 dastardly	 act
committed	 by	 the	 big	 Pandava.	 Yudhishtra	 closed	 his	 eyes	 in	 anguish	 and
Arjuna	 jumped	 down	 from	 the	 chariot,	 his	 heart	 pounding,	 his	 face	 grim.
Where	had	honour	fled?
Suyodhana	 tried	 to	 get	 up	 on	 his	 other	 leg	 but	 fell	 back	 helplessly.	 Bhima’s
legs	were	so	near.	With	a	swing	of	the	mace	he	could	bring	down	his	opponent
and	pay	him	back	in	the	same	coin.	But	he	could	not	do	that,	he	was	a	Kaurava,

ajaya,	unconquerable.	Suyodhana	grunted	in	pain.	The	leg	had	swollen.	‘Hold
on,	hold	on...’	he	thought	silently,	willing	himself	to	find	the	courage	to	go	on.
Painfully,	 Suyodhana	 raised	 himself	 using	 his	 mace	 and	 stood	 on	 one	 leg.
Suddenly,	 he	 landed	 a	 powerful	 blow	 on	 Bhima’s	 face,	 smashing	 his	 front
teeth.	Suyodhana	looked	at	Krishna	and	laughed.
“Bhima,	 smash	 his	 other	 thigh!”	 Dhaumya	 shouted	 from	 the	 safety	 of	 the
crowd.
Bhima	swung	his	mace	again	and	brought	it	down	on	Suyodhana’s	other	leg.
Suyodhana	refused	to	fall,	refused	to	cry	in	pain.	He	stood	with	his	head	held
high	as	Bhima	swung	his	mace	again	and	cracked	his	thighbone.	Slowly,	like	a
giant	tree	being	axed,	Suyodhana	fell	to	the	 ground.	His	head	 hit	the	ground,
splashing	earth	all	around.	Bhima’s	face	leered	above	him	as	the	noises	blurred
and	darkness	claimed	the	eldest	Kaurava.
Dhaumya	and	his	group	of	priests	cried	out	at	the	top	of	their	voices,	‘Dharma
has	 won!’	 The	 Guru	 raised	 his	 arms	 and	 his	 disciples	 danced	 around	 the
unconscious	Suyodhana,	singing,	“We	have	vanquished	evil.	Dharma	has	won.”
Suyodhana	 opened	 his	 eyes	 with	 great	 effort.	 The	 pain	 shooting	 from	 his
thighs	was	excruciating.	Dharma	had	won?	Suyodhana	could	stand	the	pain	but
not	such	a	blatant	untruth.	Where	was	that	Yadava	who	had	brought	this	upon
him?	Where	was	Krishna,	who	had	pointed	out	his	thigh	to	Bhima?	Suyodhana
turned	his	head	and	saw	Krishna	standing	with	his	arms	crossed	over	his	chest,
a	smile	on	his	face.	Speaking	was	an	effort	but	speak	he	would	to	the	Yadava
who	had	brought	death	and	destruction	to	his	country	and	people.	Like	a	cobra
whose	 tail	 has	 been	 smashed,	 but	 which	 retains	 life	 in	 its	 head,	 Suyodhana
raised	 himself	 on	 his	 powerful	 arms	 and	 glared	 at	 Krishna.	 “Satisfied	 now,
Yadava?	Until	the	world	lasts,	people	will	remember	your	deceit	and	cruelty.	Is
there	 one	 rule	 your	 side	 has	 not	 broken	 or	 one	 warrior	 the	 Pandavas	 killed
fairly?”
Suyodhana	 turned	 his	 head	 to	 towards	 Yudhishtra	 and	 laughed	 wearily.
“Yudhishtra,	you	think	you	have	won?	How	will	you	sleep	in	peace	hereafter?
Your	father…no,	not	your	father,	for	you	do	not	know	who	your	father	is,	but
your	 mother ’s	 husband	 cheated	 my	 blind	 father	 of	 his	 birthright	 for	 many
years.	 Now	 you	 have	 done	 the	 same	 to	 me.	 Yet	 you	 claim	 to	 believe	 in

dharma?”
Suyodhana	 faced	 Krishna.	 “You	 have	 more	 tongues	 than	 Ananta	 when	 you
speak	of	one’s	duty.	You	preach	dharma,	but	you	do	not	follow	it.	I	was	born	a
Kshatriya,	 lived	 as	 a	 Kshatriya	 and	 I	 will	 die	 a	 Kshatriya.	 I	 was	 an	 ordinary
man,	 no	 avatar,	 but	 as	 a	 ruler,	 I	 cared	 for	 all,	 never	 discriminating	 against
anyone.	 I	 never	 had	 to	 roam	 the	 forests	 like	 the	 man	 who	 claims	 to	 be
dharmaputra.	No	one	ever	dared	to	raise	a	finger	against	my	wife	or	brothers.
You	had	to	beg	for	my	mercy	to	save	your	wayward	son,	Krishna,	but	my	son
died	in	battle	for	me.	I	had	the	great	Bhishma,	Guru	Drona,	Karna,	and	many
others,	give	their	lives	for	me.	Now	I	follow	them	like	a	true	Kshatriya.	I	kept
my	word	to	Pitamaha	and	never	broke	any	of	the	rules	of	war.	Warriors	were
willing	to	die	for	me	despite	your	threats	of	hell.	You	could	not	even	convince
your	own	Narayana	Sena	to	fight	against	me.	They	died	for	me,	Krishna,	for
they	believed	dharma	was	on	my	side.	Your	people	died	for	me,	Yadava.	Think
about	that	and	then	consider	the	dharma	that	you	preach.”
Suyodhana	 paused,	 willing	 the	 darkness	 that	 threatened	 to	 overcome	 him	 to
hold	its	curtain	for	a	few	more	moments.	“I	made	one	grave	mistake,	but	I	do
not	 repent	 it.	 If	 this	 is	 punishment	 for	 that	 mistake,	 I	 shudder	 to	 think	 what
punishments	 lie	 in	 store	 for	 the	 Pandavas	 and	 you,	 Krishna.	 I	 have	 only	 one
regret,	that	my	pious	parents	will	have	no	sons	to	perform	their	last	rites.	I	go
to	where	Karna	has	gone	before	me.	If	your	Gita	is	true,	Krishna,	then	I	have
lived	and	will	die	according	to	the	Kshatriya	dharma.	The	heaven	rishis	speak
of,	for	men	who	die	doing	their	duty,	will	be	mine.	I	have	had	a	good	life	for	I
feared	no	God	or	avatar,	but	lived	as	my	heart	told	me	to.	No	priests	dictated
what	 was	 right	 and	 wrong	 to	 me.	 I	 lived	 like	 a	 man	 and	 will	 die	 as	 one.	 My
thighs	 were	 broken	 by	 foul	 play	 but	 I	 still	 hold	 my	 head	 high.	 I	 am	 blessed.
Time	 will	 tell	 who	 was	 right	 and	 who	 was	 wrong.	 You	 will	 remember	 my
words,	Krishna,	when	death	stares	you	in	the	face	one	day.	The	laws	of	karma
are	beyond	even	your	control.	Now,	go	and	leave	me	to	die	in	peace.	I	do	not
wish	your	faces	to	be	the	last	thing	I	see	on	this	beautiful	earth.	Leave	me	alone
to	ascend	to	the	abode	of	Mahadeva.”
Krishna’s	eyes	looked	away	from	the	dying	Kuru	Prince.	Suyodhana’s	words
remained	 coiled	 in	 the	 recesses	 of	 his	 mind,	 ready	 to	 strike	 on	 the	 day	 he
would	be	lying	with	an	arrow	embedded	in	his	leg.	He	turned	to	his	friends	and
said,	“It	is	over.	Dharma	has	won.”

Like	a	song	halted	midway,	the	rain	stopped	and	the	heavens	were	silent	once
again.	In	the	woods,	a	Brahmin	buried	his	face	in	his	arms	and	vowed	silently,
‘It	is	not	over.	It	is	never	over.’
*****

75			THE	OWL’S	REVENGE
	
THE	 VICTORIOUS	 PANDAVA	 ARMY	

rushed	 to	 the	 Kaurava	 camp,	 looting	 and
burning	everything	in	sight.	Yudhishtra	felt	dazed,	like	a	man	who	had	drunk
too	much	soma.	He	waited	for	the	exhilaration	of	victory	to	sweep	over	him,
but	 all	 he	 felt	 was	 a	 dreadful	 emptiness	 that	 crushed	 his	 ribs	 and	 choked	 his
breath.	The	earth	lay	desecrated	with	blood	and	mangled	flesh.	Vultures	circled
high	above	before	landing	on	carrion.	Dogs	fought	each	other	for	the	bones	of
warriors,	while	ravens	cawed,	announcing	their	feast	of	dharma.
Krishna	 pulled	 at	 the	 reins,	 stopping	 his	 chariot	 near	 Yudhishtra’s	 lonely
figure.
“Why	do	I	feel	no	elation,	Krishna?	No	joy?”
“You	are	merely	exhausted,	King	of	Hastinapura,”	Krishna	replied.
“How	will	I	face	my	uncle	and	aunt?	Suyodhana’s	words	haunt	me.	We	did	not
spare	a	single	son	of	Dhritarashtra.”
“No,	we	spared	the	noblest	of	them	all.	Have	you	forgotten	Yuyutsu,	who	sided
with	 us,	 with	 his	 fabulous	 warriors,	 when	 we	 needed	 him?	 Do	 not	 indulge	 in
morbid	thoughts.	You	have	won	and	the	people	will	soon	forget	the	rest.	What
we	 did	 was	 for	 dharma	 and	 the	 fact	 that	 we	 won	 proves	 dharma	 was	 indeed
with	us.”
“My	 mind	 is	 troubled,	 Vasudeva.	 Go	 to	 my	 Uncle	 Dhritarashtra	 and	 Aunt
Gandhari	and	prepare	them	for	the	terrible	news	of	their	sons’	deaths.”
“If	you	wish	it	so.	I	will	convince	them	their	sons	deserved	to	die.”
“Krishna,	I	have	always	trusted	you.	Respect	their	grief.”

Krishna	smiled.	“Rejoice	in	your	victory,	Yudhishtra,	for	Bharatavarsha	has	a
new	Emperor	who	will	respect	the	scriptures	and	follow	dharma.”
***
Dhaumya	 arrived	 to	 announce	 that	 the	 riches	 of	 Suyodhana’s	 camp	 had	 been
secured.	 By	 law,	 whatever	 the	 vanquished	 enemy	 had	 owned	 belonged	 to	 the
victor.	Arjuna	hesitated,	his	mind	filled	with	a	stange	unease	that	he	could	not
quell.
“It	 is	 as	 the	 good	 priest	 says,	 Partha.	 Enjoy	 what	 you	 have	 earned	 with	 your
prowess	and	skill.	Now	get	down	from	the	chariot,	your	brother	has	given	me
an	errand	to	perform,”	said	Krishna.
Arjuna	 sighed	 and	 descended	 from	 the	 chariot	 that	 had	 carried	 him	 through
eighteen	 days	 of	 warfare.	 Bhima	 arrived,	 pulling	 Draupadi	 with	 him.	 Nakula
and	Sahadeva	followed	behind.
“All	 Suyodhana’s	 wealth	 is	 now	 mine.	 How	 sweet	 victory	 is!”	 Draupadi	 said.
Yudhishtra	shook	his	head,	dismayed	and	troubled.
“The	 saint	 is	 worried.	 Brother,	 forget	 your	 cares	 and	 laugh	 with	 us,”	 Bhima
said,	thowing	an	arm	over	Yudhishtra’s	shoulder.
“If	only	we	had	the	gem	Aswathama	wears,”	Draupadi	sighed.
“Beware	 what	 you	 wish	 for,	 Draupadi.	 Fate	 has	 a	 nasty	 habit	 of	 fulfilling
wishes	in	a	way	you	never	wished	for.”
“Playing	 with	 words	 as	 usual,	 Krishna?	 Come	 down	 from	 that	 chariot.	 How
can	 I	 thank	 you	 for	 all	 that	 you	 have	 done?”	 Draupadi	 laughed	 as	 Krishna
jumped	 down	 with	 a	 smile.	 At	 that	 moment,	 lightning	 struck	 the	 chariot,
stunning	everyone.	It	burst	into	flames,	the	horses	neighing	desperately	in	the
throes	of	death.
“Krishna,	an	ill	omen!	I	am	afraid	the	Gods	are	angry	with	us	for	killing	all	the
maharathis	 of	 the	 Kauravas.	 Have	 mercy	 on	 us.”	 “Yudhishtra,	 you	 are	 no
longer	the	mendicant	banished	to	the	forest.	You	are	the	Lord	of	Bharatavarsha.
Do	 not	 worry	 about	 the	 chariot.	 It	 was	 already	 burnt	 when	 Bhishma’s	 arrow

struck	it	on	the	first	day	of	the	war.	I	kept	it	intact.	Now,	since	the	war	is	over,	it
has	exploded.”
“Hare	 Krishna!	 Behold	 the	 glory	 and	 miracle	 of	 the	 great	 Lord,”	 Dhaumya
cried.	The	crowd	broke	into	a	frenzied	chanting	of	the	Lord’s	name.	Krishna
raised	 his	 right	 hand	 in	 benediction,	 smiling	 at	 the	 faithful	 in	 all	 his	 divine
glory.
“I	 wish	 to	 bathe	 in	 scented	 water	 and	 sleep	 in	 a	 soft	 bed	 again	 after	 thirteen
long	years.	I	am	going	to	the	palace	at	Upapiplava,”	said	Draupadi,	looking	at
her	husbands.
“Queen	Draupadi,”	Krishna	said	in	a	teasing	tone,	“take	your	sons	with	you	to
the	palace.”
“My	sons	are	with	my	brother,	to	celebrate	the	great	victory.	The	boys	deserve
it,”	Draupadi	said	and	then	called	for	the	servants	to	bring	her	palanquin.
Bhima	 whispered	 in	 Yudhishtra’s	 ear,	 “Draupadi	 adores	 that	 gem	 Aswathama
wears.	 Where	 has	 the	 cursed	 Brahmin	 gone?	 I	 will	 slay	 him	 and	 bring	 it	 to
her.”
Yudhishtra	 turned	 to	 look	 at	 Bhima.	 Did	 the	 same	 blood	 run	 in	 their	 veins?
“Has	 your	 thirst	 for	 blood	 not	 been	 quenched	 even	 after	 such	 carnage,	 my
brother?	Let	us	not	add	the	sin	of	Brahmahatya.	Leave	Aswathama	alone.”
“We	already	have	the	sin	of	Brahmahatya	on	us.	Remember,	your	own	words
caused	Guru	Drona’s	fall.”
There	was	no	refuting	Bhima’s	words.	Yudhishtra	looked	away,	ashamed.
“Brother,	forgive	my	harsh	words.	We	are	going	to	Duryodhana’s	camp;	there
are	many	men	and	women	there	who	are	now	our	slaves.	Guru	Dhaumya	has
declared	 that	all	 the	Shudras	will	 be	our	dasas	 as	 in	 the	 days	 of	 old.	 We	 will
restore	our	great	traditions.”
Yudhishtra	remained	silent.	Bhima	bowed	and	was	about	to	leave,	but	hesitated
before	climbing	into	his	chariot.	“Brother,	something	tells	me	that	the	Brahmin
is	 dangerous.	 He	 is	 like	 a	 wounded	 tiger.	 He	 will	 strike	 back.	 Give	 me

permission	to	hunt	him	down.”
“No,	 Bhima,	 I	 will	 allow	 no	 more	 killing.	 How	 I	 wish	 Lord	 Balarama	 was
here!”
Bhima	shook	his	head	and	ordered	his	charioteer	to	drive	him	to	Duryodhana’s
camp.	 The	 spoils	 of	 war	 awaited	 him.	 How	 good	 it	 would	 feel	 to	 sleep	 in
Duryodhana’s	 bed,	 how	 poetic	 and	 sweet	 would	 be	 the	 revenge	 of	 drinking
soma	from	his	crystal	cup.	Bhima	turned	and	saw	Yudhishtra	walking	towards
the	spot	where	Bhishma	lay	dying.	His	brother	was	unpredictable.	What	good
would	 it	 do	 him	 to	 visit	 the	 dying	 old	 man	 when	 the	 Goddess	 of	 victory	 had
become	their	consort?
****
An	owl	swooped	down	into	a	tree	and	the	crows	there	cawed	in	fear.	“Night	has
made	the	bird	stronger.	Do	you	understand,	Uncle?”	Aswathama	asked	Kripa.
The	 gem	 he	 wore	 in	 his	 headcloth	 glittered	 as	 lightning	 flashed	 though	 the
forest,	turning	night	into	day.	Darkness	immediately	rushed	back,	cloaking	the
world	in	shadow.
“Sneaking	 into	 the	 Pandava	 camp	 at	 night	 is	 downright	 crazy,	 Aswathama,”
Kripa	 replied,	 squatting	 beside	 the	 lake,	 not	 far	 from	 where	 Suyodhana	 lay
dying.
Kritavarma	stood	nearby,	deep	in	thought.	“Kripa,	Bhima	hit	Suyodhana	below
the	waist.	He	is	worse	than	any	Mlecha!”
Aswathama’s	patience	snapped.	“I	owe	it	to	Suyodhana.”
“How	will	the	three	of	you	do	it	when	there	are	over	five	thousand	warriors	in
their	camp?”	Kripa	asked,	annoyed	by	his	nephew’s	lack	of	common	sense.
“I	don’t	know	how,	Uncle,	but	I	must	do	it	if	I	am	to	ever	find	peace	again.”
“We	 can	 surrender	 and	 then	 gradually	 incite	 the	 people.	 We	 can	 have	 a
revolution	soon	and...”
“No,	Kritavarma,	this	must	be	done	tonight.	Shiva,	give	me	courage,	give	me

power.”
“Pray,	and	perhaps	the	Lord	will	clear	your	muddled	mind	from	such	foolish
thoughts,”	snapped	Kripa.
Like	 a	 man	 possessed,	 Aswathama	 ran	 into	 the	 forest.	 Kripa	 and	 Kritavarma
looked	at	each	other	in	astonishment.	Kripa	uttered	a	curse	and	began	running
behind	Aswathama.	Kritavarma	followed.	The	sky	cracked	open	with	lightning
and	 a	drizzle	began.	They	could	hear	Aswathama	running	through	the	forest,
stumbling	on	roots,	crashing	into	bushes	and	chanting	the	name	of	Shiva.	Birds
awoke	in	screeching	panic	above	them	and	hares	scurried	away	in	alarm.
Kripa	and	Kritavarma	lost	Aswathama	for	some	time	and	when	they	found	him
again,	 he	 was	 lying	 prostrate	 before	 the	 idol	 of	 Rudra,	 the	 fiercest	 form	 of
Shiva.	Thunder	clapped	and	lightning	flashed,	lighting	up	another	statue	nearby
–	Drona	stared	at	them	in	stone.	With	a	shock,	they	realised	they	were	standing
in	 Ekalavya’s	 practice	 ground.	 What	 forces	 had	 led	 their	 feet	 to	 this	 place,
hidden	 deep	 in	 the	 forest?	 The	 storm	 raged	 around	 them.	 Was	 Rudra
welcoming	them	with	his	thousand	arms	or	sending	them	a	warning?
Aswathama’s	 voice	 rose	 over	 the	 thunder.	 “Oh	 Shiva,	 Lord	 of	 the	 Universe,
Lord	of	all	beasts,	humans	and	demigods,	Lord	of	Kailasa,	be	one	with	me	in
my	 fight	 for	 dharma.	 Be	 the	 strength	 in	 my	 arms,	 the	 fire	 in	 my	 eyes,	 the
power	in	my	bow	and	the	sharpness	in	my	sword.	I	go	to	do	what	no	warrior
should,	knowing	I	will	be	despised	for	attacking	my	enemy	while	they	sleep.	I
do	 it	 for	 my	 country,	 for	 the	 future	 of	 Bharatavarsha,	 and	 for	 my	 friend.	 If
loving	my	motherland	is	a	crime,	let	me	be	called	a	criminal.	If	friendship	is	a
sin,	let	me	be	a	sinner.	Let	all	the	blame	be	mine,	but	give	me	the	courage	for
this	 one	 night.	 Be	 with	 me,	 All-merciful,	 All-knowing,	 All-powerful
Parmeshwara.	Oh	Destroyer	of	the	Universe,	be	the	sword	in	my	hand	tonight.”
Kripa	and	Kritavarma	stood	watching	Aswathama	as	the	idol	of	Shiva	shone	in
the	lightning.	A	cobra	traced	its	way	up	to	the	throat	of	the	idol,	spread	its	hood
and	 hissed	 at	 them.	 Aswathama	 raised	 his	 head	 and	 the	 gem	 in	 his	 headcloth
sparkled.	The	cobra	slid	down	the	statue	and	vanished	back	into	the	bushes.
“Can	we	help	you,	Mahabrahmana?”	a	voice	whispered,	startling	the	three	men.

Kripa	 unsheathed	 his	 sword	 and	 stood	 in	 combat	 position.	 Wind	 rushed	 past
their	ears	as	Kritavarma	took	a	tentative	step	towards	the	prostrate	Aswathama.
Who	had	spoken?	Kritavarma	stared	at	the	idol	of	Shiva	in	disbelief.	Suddenly,
as	lightning	flashed	and	the	earth	rumbled	to	the	sound	of	thunder,	an	old	man
stepped	forward.	He	stood	leaning	on	his	staff,	his	white	hair	flying	in	the	wind
like	the	mane	of	a	fleeing	horse.
“Vasuki!”	Kripa	said,	astonished.
Aswathama	 scrambled	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 Vasuki	 bowed	 to	 him.	 “Mahabrahmana,
we,	the	Nagas,	are	with	you	in	your	divine	mission.	If	we	do	not	do	something
tonight,	our	lives	will	be	as	stormy	and	dark	as	this	evil	night.	You	are	Rudra,
the	 destroyer	 of	 foes	 and	 we	 are	 your	bhutas.	 The	 cobra	 was	 an	 omen.	 Our
people	are	at	your	service.”
Vasuki	gave	a	low	whistle	and	men	slithered	down	from	the	trees	around	them.
Armed	with	maces,	bows	and	poisoned	arrows,	the	Nagas	surrounded	the	three
warriors.	 Vasuki	 leaned	 on	 his	 staff	 and	 proclaimed,	 “Today	 is	 the	 day	 for
revenge,	for	Ekalavya,	Iravan,	Khatotkacha,	and	the	countless	others	who	died
in	Khandivaprastha.	We	shall	avenge	our	brothers.	Just	as	Krishna	and	Arjuna
trapped	 us	 in	 Khandiva,	 we	 shall	 trap	 them	 in	 their	 dwelling.	 The	 wheel	 of
dharma	belongs	to	no	man.	Dharma	is	time	and	time	is	Mahadeva,	the	Lord	of
destruction.	The	wheel	is	turning,	my	friends,	and	it	will	crush	those	who	are
now	riding	high.	Hail	Kalabhairava,	Lord	of	Time!”
Thunder	 crashed	 overhead	 but	 hundreds	 of	 Nagas	 raised	 their	 maces	 and
tridents	 and	 roared	 in	 unison,	 “Har	 Har	 Mahadeva!”,	 as	 if	 challenging	 the
very	heavens.
Aswathama	 prised	 the	 sword	 from	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 Rudra	 idol	 and	 bowed
before	 his	 father ’s	 statue.	 “Bless	 me,	 Father.	 Forgive	 me	 for	 what	 I	 do,”	 he
whispered.	 He	 paused	 for	 a	 moment	 to	 look	 at	 the	 angry	 skies.	 The	 gem
sparkled	like	a	star.	Then	he	began	running	to	where	the	Pandavas	slept,	smug
in	their	victory.	Kripa	and	Kritavarma	followed.	Like	the	bhutas	of	Shiva,	the
Nagas	ran	after	Aswathama,	as	stealthy	as	a	cobra	stalking	its	prey.
Vasuki	watched	them	disappear	into	the	forest	and	then	fell	on	his	knees	before
the	idol	of	Shiva.	“Forgive	me,	Lord,	for	what	I	have	done	to	the	only	Brahmin

who	was	compassionate	to	our	people.	But	I	had	no	other	choice.	Be	merciful.”
He	waited	for	a	sign	that	his	Lord	had	forgiven	him	but	all	he	heard	was	the
roar	of	the	storm.	Nor	did	he	see	the	cobra	slithering	towards	him.
***
Krishna	 stood	 uneasily	 before	 Dhritarashtra	 and	 Gandhari.	 The	 old	 King	 sat
with	a	bowed	head,	his	strong	arms	tense.
“You	did	not	have	the	kindness	to	spare	at	least	one	son,	Krishna?”	Gandhari
asked	in	a	cold	voice	from	which	all	emotion	had	fled.
Krishna	did	not	reply.	Dhritarashtra’s	body	shook	and	he	wept	like	a	distraught
child.	 Gandhari	 put	 a	 comforting	 hand	 on	 her	 husband’s	 shoulder.	 Finally,
Dhritarashtra	 said	 in	 a	 hoarse	 voice,	 “I	 heard	 how	 Bhima	 killed	 Suyodhana.
Sanjaya	 told	 me.	 I	 bow	 to	 your	 sense	 of	 dharma.	 May	 you	 and	 your	 tribe
increase,	my	Lord.”
“Your	son	had	perpetuated	evil	in	this	land.	He	stole	what	was	Yudhishtra’s	and
refused	to	return	it.	I	tried	for	peace	and	he	insulted	me.	I	had	warned	you	of
this	that	day,	revered	Kuru	King,”	Krishna	said	in	a	soft	voice.
“The	kingship	belongs	to	me,	Vasudeva	Krishna.	Fate	made	me	blind	but	that
does	not	mean	my	firstborn	had	to	be	unlucky,	too.	You	stole	what	belonged	to
me	and	gave	it	to	others	–	my	kingdom,	my	sons,	everything.	The	seers	should
have	 known	 that	 the	 one	 who	 stole	 butter	 in	 his	 childhood	 would	 steal
kingdoms	when	he	grew	up.”
“My	 Lord,	 sorrow	 has	 blunted	 your	 wisdom.	 Your	 son	 tried	 to	 strip	 his
cousin’s	wife,	and	he	paid	the	price.	So	did	the	great	Bhishma,	Drona	and	all
the	 others	 –	 they	 paid	 with	 their	 lives	 for	 their	 silence.	 That	 is	 the	 law	 of
dharma.	I	am	just	a	dharmapurusha,	an	agent.	Dharma	is	eternal,	unchanging,
omnipotent.”
Dhritarashtra	had	nothing	more	to	say.	His	tears	had	dried.	He	lay	down	on	his
bed	 and	turned	his	face	to	the	wall.	Krishna	waited	nearby,	fidgeting	with	his
flute.
Gandhari	said,	“The	King	needs	to	rest.”	Krishna	bowed	and	was	about	to	leave

when	Gandhari’s	soft	words	pierced	his	heart.	“Prabhu,	what	was	my	Vikarna’s
fault?	He	was	the	only	one	who	spoke	up	in	the	Sabha.	We	shall	meet	tomorrow
at	 my	 son’s	 funeral,	 tell	 me	 then	 so	 that	 a	 mother ’s	 heart	 can	 be	 soothed	 by
dharma.”
Krishna	 bowed	 again	 and	 gently	 closed	 the	 door	 of	 the	 royal	 chamber.	 He
sighed	as	he	stood	in	the	veranda	of	the	Hastinapura	palace.	The	massive	stone
building	was	eerily	silent	except	for	the	sobs	coming	from	its	unlit	rooms.	The
thunderstorm	had	not	passed.	As	his	eyes	scanned	the	south,	his	heart	began	to
hammer.	 His	 sharp	 ears	 had	 picked	 up	 the	 sound	 of	 marching	 men.	 He	 leapt
from	 the	 balcony	 and	 jumped	 into	 the	 saddle	 of	 his	 waiting	 horse.	 He	 knew
what	was	happening.	The	Brahmin	they	had	let	go	was	returning.	He	prayed	he
was	not	too	late.
***
Three	dark	figures	stood	with	bated	breath	before	the	Pandava	camp.	The	eyes
in	 Iravan’s	 head	 gleamed	 in	 the	 moonlight	 and	 a	 strange	 fear	 gripped	 them.
The	 Nagas	 were	 restless	 as	 they	 waited	 for	 instructions.	 They	 shuffled	 their
feet	and	whispered	to	each	other	in	hushed	voices.	It	was	grotesque,	the	irony
of	 the	 laughter	 they	 had	 heard,	 the	 cruelty	 of	 the	 merriment	 in	 the	 Pandava
camp.	 Now	 the	 camp	 lay	 crouched	 like	 a	 sleepy	 beast,	 slumbering	 in
drunkenness,	careless	in	victory.	Rain	had	made	the	ground	slushy.
A	 deep	 moan	 sounded,	 it	 came	 from	 Kurukshetra.	 Was	 it	 Bhishma	 or
Suyodhana?	Aswathama	gritted	his	teeth.	“You	two	stand	at	the	gate	and	do	not
allow	 anyone	 to	 escape.	 I	 am	 going	 in	 with	 them,”	 Aswathama	 said	 to	 Kripa
and	Kritavarma,	gesturing	to	his	Naga	companions.	He	turned	and	rushed	at	the
guards	 at	 the	 gate.	 Before	 they	 knew	 what	 was	 happening	 he	 had	 plunged	 his
sword	into	their	hearts.	The	Nagas	lit	their	torches,	illuminating	their	painted
faces	 and	 hair	 tied	 to	 resemble	 cobra	 hoods.	 Their	 ash-smeared	 bodies	 and
tridents	 made	 them	 look	 like	 creatures	 from	 another	 world.	 Howling	 and
ululating	 war	 cries	 as	 old	 as	 humanity,	 they	 broke	 into	 the	 Pandava	 camp,
slaughtering	everyone	in	sight.
Aswathama	 ran	 from	 cottage	 to	 cottage,	 searching	 for	 the	 Pandavas.	 He
stumbled	 upon	 half-naked	 men,	 tottering	 out	 on	 drunken	 legs	 and	 quickly
dispatched	them	to	the	abode	of	Yama.	The	Nagas	were	setting	fire	to	the	camp

and	 letting	 loose	 the	 elephants	 and	 horses	 from	 their	 stables.	 The	 beasts	 ran
amok.	Many	of	the	Pandava	warriors	were	crushed	under	the	stampeding	feet
of	 the	 elephants	 before	 they	 even	 knew	 what	 was	 happening.	 Others	 were
terrified	 by	 the	 sight	 of	 the	 Nagas	 aiming	 tridents	 at	 them.	 “Rakshasas	 are
attacking!	 Shiva	 gunas	 are	 attacking!”	 they	 screamed,	 not	 sure	 if	 what	 they
were	 seeing	 was	 real	 or	 the	 effects	 of	 the	 soma	 they	 had	 consumed.	 Panic
gripped	 the	 Pandava	 camp	 and	 they	 began	 indiscriminately	 firing	 arrows,
swinging	swords	and	bludgeoning	with	their	maces	whoever	they	found.	The
few	 who	 managed	 to	 escape,	 fell	 into	 the	 waiting	 hands	 of	 Kripa	 and
Kritavarma,	who	showed	no	mercy.	The	fire	that	had	lit	Khandiva	years	before
and	killed	thousands	of	Nagas	had	come	back	to	 destroy	Arjuna’s	camp.	The
wheel	of	dharma	kept	turning.
Aswathama	kicked	open	the	door	of	a	luxurious-looking	camp	and	saw	a	man
looking	 out	 of	 his	 window.	 “Time	 to	 go,	 friend,”	 he	 said	 in	 a	 calm	 voice.
Dhristadyumna	 looked	 at	 Aswathama	 and	 froze	 in	 fear.	 Before	 he	 could
scream,	Aswathama	had	kicked	him	in	the	groin.	He	doubled	up	on	the	floor,
writhing	in	pain.	Grabbing	hold	of	Dhristadyumna’s	hair,	Aswathama	dragged
him	out	and	kicked	him	in	the	ribs.
“It	 is	 wrong	 to	 kick	 me	 when	 I	 am	 down	 and	 unarmed,”	 pleaded	 the
Commander	of	the	Pandava	army.
“Yes	 it	 is,	 and	 it	 is	 all	 you	 deserve,	 you	 scoundrel!”	 Aswathama	 pressed	 his
knees	on	Dhristadyumna’s	chest,	pinning	him	to	the	ground.	“It	would	appear
that	 a	 prostitute	 has	 begun	 preaching	 the	 virtue	 of	 chastity.”	 Aswathama
smashed	his	opponent’s	face	with	the	hilt	of	his	sword.
Dhristadyumna	clutched	at	his	broken	nose,	blood	spurting	through	his	fingers.
Aswathama	 grabbed	 his	 arm	 and	 started	 hacking	 off	 his	 fingers,	 one	 by	 one.
“Mercy,	mercy...”	Dhristadyumna	begged.
“Mercy,	 mercy...”	 Aswathama	 mimicked,	 pressing	 the	 edge	 of	 his	 sword	 to
Dhristadyumna’s	 throat.	 “You	 cut	 off	 my	 father ’s	 head	 when	 he	 was	 bowed
with	grief	and	now	you	squeal	like	a	pig?”
“Kill	me	if	you	must,	but	do	not	torture	me...“

“Bhishma	is	lying	there	out	in	the	cold,	waiting	for	death.	Suyodhana	is	lying
with	his	thighs	broken.	You	are	a	lucky	bastard	to	die	so	easily.	Have	you	ever
killed	a	chicken?”	Aswathama	asked	as	he	threw	down	his	sword	and	cracked
his	knuckles.
When	 realisation	 dawned,	 Dhristadyumna	 begged,	 “No,	 oh	 no...that	 is	 so
disgraceful.	I	am	a	Kshatriya.	Give	me	a	death	befitting	a	warrior.	Kill	me	with
your	sword.”
“Bare	 hands	 give	 more	 satisfaction.”	 Aswathama	 gripped	 Dhristadyumna’s
throat	 with	 both	 hands.	 “I	 want	 to	 see	 the	 fear	 in	 your	 face,	 to	 see	 your	 eyes
popping	out	as	you	run	out	of	breath,	like	this,	this,	this	and...”	He	peered	into
Dhristadyumna’s	eyes.	“And	the	final	snap	of	your	throat.	Farewell!”	He	kicked
Dhristadyumna’s	 inert	 body	 away	 and	 let	 out	 an	 animal	 howl.	 He	 had	 much
more	work	to	do.
In	the	shadows,	the	eunuch	waited	for	him.	Shikandi	swung	his	sword	and	hit
Aswathama’s	head.	The	Brahmin’s	instincts	saved	him	as	he	deflected	the	blow
with	 his	 sword,	 but	 the	 eunuch	 managed	 to	 inflict	 a	 gash	 on	 his	 forehead.
Aswathama	 knocked	 him	 down	 and	 plunged	 his	 sword	 deep	 into	 Shikandi’s
heart.	He	kept	stabbing	until	he	was	sure	the	eunuch	was	dead.
Around	 him,	 tents	 were	 on	 fire.	 Kripa	 and	 Kritavarma	 had	 entered	 the	 camp
and	were	running	around,	holding	flaming	torches	in	one	hand	and	swords	in
the	 other,	 setting	 the	 tents	 alight.	 Men	 and	 women	 were	 running	 in	 panic,
screaming	and	falling	over	each	other.
Where	were	the	Pandavas?	An	arrow	hit	the	gem	on	Aswathama’s	forehead	and
fell	 at	 his	 feet.	 He	 touched	 his	 forehead.	 The	 gem	 was	 still	 there	 but	 his
forehead	 was	 bleeding.	 Aswathama	 turned	 to	 see	 where	 the	 arrow	 had	 come
from.	Another	swished	past	him,	a	finger ’s	breadth	from	his	throat.	He	ran	to
the	hut	from	where	the	arrow	had	come	and	smashed	open	the	door	with	a	kick.
He	 saw	 five	 men	 in	 the	 dancing	 light	 of	 the	 fire	 that	 was	 devouring	 the	 huts
nearby.	 They	 were	 all	 choking,	 coughing	 and	 panting	 in	 the	 smoke.	 The	 heat
was	unbearable.	Aswathama	caught	hold	of	one	of	the	men.	In	the	glow	of	the
flames,	there	was	no	mistaking	his	face.	“Here	goes	the	gambler.”	Aswathama
cut	off	the	head	with	a	swift	swing	of	his	sword.	His	laughter	rose	above	the
crackling	 of	 the	 fire	 and	 the	 terrified	 screams	 outside.	 Then	 he	 caught	 the

biggest	of	the	remaining	men	and	thrust	his	sword	through	his	heart.	“This	is
for	shattering	Suyodhana’s	thighs,	Bhima.	May	you	rot	in	hell!”
“Where	 is	 that	 shameless	 cheat	 who	 shot	 Karna	 when	 he	 was	 down?	 Ah,
Arjuna,	why	are	you	hiding	behind	the	pillar?	First	you	hide	behind	a	eunuch,
then	you	crouch	like	a	lizard	in	the	cracks	of	the	wall!	What	a	warrior	you	are,
my	friend!	Aswathama	cut	off	the	man’s	head.
Aswathama	advanced	on	the	last	two.	A	burning	pole	fell	behind	them.	With	a
swing,	 Aswathama	 cut	 off	 both	 their	 heads.	 Then	 he	 ran	 out	 screaming,
“Suyodhana,	we	have	won	the	war!	Dharma	has	won!	I	have	won	the	war	for
you.	The	Pandavas	are	dead!	I	killed	them.	Where	there	is	dharma,	there	will	be
victory.”
An	 owl	 sat	 pecking	 out	 the	 eyes	 from	 Iravan’s	 head.	 As	 Aswathama	 ran
towards	 Suyodhana,	 screaming	 victory,	 it	 gave	 a	 hoot	 and	 vanished	 into	 the
night.
Kripa	ran	into	the	hut	that	and	looked	at	the	five	slain	bodies.	“Oh,	Shiva!	He
has	made	a	terrible	mistake,”	he	whispered,	horrified	by	what	he	saw.	He	ran
into	the	fiery	night	calling	for	Aswathama.	Kritavarma	turned	the	bodies	over
to	 examine	 them	 and	 felt	 panic	 and	 guilt	 overcome	 him.	 They	 would	 now	 be
hunted	like	mad	dogs	and	slain.	He	was	sure	of	it.	He	ran	out	and	mounted	a
horse	 that	 had	 strayed	 and	 galloped	 off	 towards	 Dwaraka.	 The	 Nagas	 stayed
back	to	butcher	the	last	of	the	men	and	women	in	the	camp.	Drunk	on	bloodlust	and	euphoria,	they	danced	as	the	fire	blazed	around	them.
Kripa	caught	up	with	Aswathama	and	grabbed	his	shoulder	to	stop	him.	“Uncle,
I	must	see	Suyodhana	and	break	the	good	news.”
“Fool!	You	have	not	killed	the	Pandavas,	but	Draupadi’s	sons!	They	will	come
after	 you.	 Run	 for	 your	 life	 if	 you	 want	 to	 live	 to	 fight	 again.	 I	 am	 going	 to
Hastinapura,	 to	 hide	 in	 the	 slums.	 Run	 to	 Vyasa’s	 ashram.	 Only	 he	 can	 save
you.”	Without	waiting	for	a	response,	Kripa	vanished	into	the	night.
Surely	Kripa	was	wrong?	But	Aswathama	remembered	their	faces,	how	he	had
killed	them	so	easily.	They	were	teenaged	boys,	not	seasoned	warriors.	He	had
known	 it	 when	 he	 killed	 them,	 but	 had	 tried	 to	 convince	 himself	 that	 he	 had

killed	 the	 Pandavas,	 not	 their	 sons.	 Now,	 when	 Kripa	 had	 said	 the	 words,	 the
magnitude	of	his	crime	hit	him	like	a	thunderbolt.	‘Oh,	Shiva!	What	a	heinous
crime	 I	 have	 committed!’	 Aswathama	 fell	 to	 the	 ground,	 his	 knees	 buckling
under	the	burden	of	his	guilt.
But	the	sound	of	a	galloping	horse	caused	his	warrior	instincts	to	become	alert
once	 more,	 wary	 of	 danger.	 No,	 he	 told	 himself,	 he	 had	 killed	 the	 Pandavas.
Kripa	was	wrong.
Aswathama	 saw	 a	 warrior	 galloping	 towards	 the	 blazing	 camp.	 As	 the
horseman	neared,	he	saw	Krishna’s	grief-stricken	face.	Aswathama	got	up	and
ran	on,	stumbling	over	rocks	and	bruising	his	knees	as	he	staggered	through
the	dark.	He	had	to	meet	Vyasa	but	he	had	to	see	Suyodhana	as	well.	Aswathama
stood	panting	under	a	tree.	Night	grew	old	around	him	and	the	greyness	of	a
dreaded	day	crept	in	from	the	east.	He	was	afraid	of	what	the	new	day	would
bring.	He	hoped	his	friend	was	not	dead.	He	had	to	hurry	to	the	cold	swamps	of
Samanthapanchaka	lake.	Perhaps	it	was	unnecessary	to	say	anything	at	all	to	his
friend.	It	was	best	to	let	him	go	in	peace.
***
When	 Krishna	 reached	 the	 Pandava	 camp,	 the	 Nagas	 had	 gone,	 leaving	 the
ground	 littered	 with	 the	 lifeless	 bodies	 of	 men,	 women	 and	 beasts.	 Krishna
surveyed	the	carnage	as	the	sun	rose	behind	him.	He	sighed.	The	nineteenth	day
was	dawning	and	the	earth	was	as	blood	red	as	the	eastern	sky.	The	war,	which
he	 had	 won	 with	 so	 much	 guile,	 looked	 so	 meaningless	 now.	 He	 saw	 a	 man
sitting	 by	 the	 river,	 his	 head	 buried	 in	 his	 hands.	 Krishna	 walked	 towards
Yudhishtra	in	silence.	For	the	first	time	in	his	life,	he	had	no	words.
*****

76			THE	CURSED
	
THE	LAKE	HAD	TURNED	CRIMSON 	when	Aswathama	reached	its	banks.	He	dragged

himself	 through	 ankle-deep	 mud,	 frightening	 the	 Sarus	 cranes	 in	 the	 rushes;
into	flying	away	with	wide,	flapping	wings.	He	panted	in	exhaustion,	stopping
every	few	feet.	He	was	not	sure	where	he	was	bleeding	from	or	where	he	was
hurt.	 He	 called	 his	 friend’s	 name	 frantically,	 desperately	 swishing	 his	 sword
left	and	right	to	cut	down	the	swamp	grass.	Any	moment	they	would	come	for
him.	Where	had	Suyodhana	dragged	himself	to	die?
Aswathama	 saw	 him	 half-buried	 in	 the	 sludge,	 lying	 on	 his	 back,	 his	 eyes
closed,	 his	 mouth	 slightly	 open.	 Flies	 buzzed	 over	 Suyodhana’s	 face.	 When
Aswathama	reached	him,	he	slowed	down,	afraid	of	the	finality	of	everything.
A	 trickle	 of	 blood	 had	 dried	 at	 the	 corners	 of	 the	 Prince’s	 mouth.	 As	 he
approached	with	tentative	steps,	mice	scurried	away.	The	Brahmin	collapsed	to
his	knees	near	the	man	he	had	loved	so	dearly,	the	friend	of	his	childhood	and
the	brother	he	had	never	had.
“Suyodhana,	 wake	 up!	 I	 have	 killed	 them	 all!”	 Aswathama	 shook	 his	 friend’s
cold	body,	afraid	it	was	too	late.	He	put	his	ear	to	the	broad	chest.	Was	there	a
flicker	of	life?
“Karna...Karna,	you	defeated	them?”	Suyodhana	whispered.	His	swollen	thighs
had	turned	black;	gangrene	had	begun	to	set	in	and	his	body	burned	with	fever.
Aswathama	 was	 overwhelmed	 with	 emotion,	 Suyodhana	 was	 not	 dead.	 Then
bitterness	washed	over	hm.	“Suyodhana,	Karna	did	not	win	the	war,	I	did.	He
had	 the	 opportunity	 to	 kill	 Yudhishtra,	 Bhima	 and	 the	 twins,	 but	 he	 did	 not,
because	 he	 gave	 his	 word	 to	 the	 mother	 of	 the	 Pandavas.	 He	 gave	 away	 his
armour	 so	 people	 would	 think	 he	 was	 a	 great	 man.	 He	 betrayed	 you	 for	 his
own	glory	and	still	you	speak	only	his	name?”

“Who...are	you?”
“Suyodhana,	it	is	I,	Aswathama.	I	have	won	the	war	for	you,	not	Karna.	Open
your	eyes.	I	have	forsaken	glory	to	do	what	no	Brahmin	or	warrior	should.	I
set	fire	to	their	tents	and	killed	them	in	their	sleep	–	a	shameful	thing,	but	I	did
it	for	you,	my	friend,	and	for	my	father.”	He	was	not	sure	the	men	he	had	killed
were	the	Pandavas	or	their	sons,	but	Suyodhana	need	not	know	that	in	his	final
moments.	But	the	weight	of	the	lie	lay	heavy	on	Aswathama’s	heart.
“Ah,	Aswathama,	where...is	Karna?”	Suyodhana	opened	his	eyes
“Karna	 is	 dead,	 killed	 by	 Arjuna.	 You	 gave	 him	 everything,	 but	 he	 betrayed
you.”
“Karna	could	never	betray	me,	or	you...“
“Oh,	 Suyodhana,	 do	 not	 die	 now	 when	 we	 have	 won.	 Tell	 me	 what	 I	 did	 was
right.”
“You	have	betrayed...dharma,	Aswathama.”
“Suyodhana,	I	did	it	for	you...to	avenge	you...”
“Aswathama...no...”	 Suyodhana	 was	 delirious	 and	 in	 pain,	 struggling	 to	 form
words	as	his	life	ebbed	away.
“I	have	lived	for	you,	Suyodhana.	I	have	lived	for	our	country.	Do	not	call	me
a	 traitor.”	 Aswathama	 threw	 his	 arms	 across	 Suyodhana’s	 inert	 body,	 trying
hard	to	fight	back	his	tears.	“Don’t	go,	my	friend.	We	have	a	country	to	rule,
with	justice,	equality	and	prosperity	for	all.	We	have	a	dream	to	live.	Do	not	go
and	leave	me	alone.”
“You	 are	 still	 my	 friend...”	 Suyodhana’s	 words	 were	 barely	 a	 whisper.
Aswathama	bent	his	ear	to	Suyodhana’s	lips	to	hear.	“Aswathama,	you	are	my
dearest	friend...after	Karna.”
“After	 Karna,	 Suyodhana?”	 Aswathama	 looked	 up.	 The	 eyes	 that	 had	 once
burned	with	passion,	were	closed	forever.	He	gently	placed	Suyodhana’s	head
on	 the	 wet	 ground.	 The	 Crown	 Prince	 of	 Hastinapura	 had	 reached	 the	 end	 of

his	 star-crossed	 life.	 A	 plentitude	 of	 gifts	 and	 sorrow	 had	 been	 his	 in	 equal
measure.	How	fearlessly	he	had	believed	in	justice	for	all,	how	fiercely	he	had
fought	against	caste,	yet	he	was	powerless	before	the	frailties	of	human	pride.
There	was	no	man	Aswathama	had	loved	more,	yet	his	friend’s	last	words	hurt
him	more	than	all	the	arrows	of	Kurukshetra.
“After	 Karna...”	 Karna	 the	 glorious,	 Karna	 the	 Dharmaveera,	 Karna	 the	 man
who	 died	 for	 his	 friend.	 Poets	 would	 sing	 of	 the	 friendship	 between	 the	 Suta
and	 the	 Prince.	 And	 the	 poor	 Brahmin	 would	 be	 a	 forgotten	 footnote	 in	 the
history	of	great	men.	Aswathama,	the	despised,	the	cursed,	the	man	who	killed
his	 enemies	 in	 their	 sleep.	 The	 Brahmin	 bit	 his	 lip,	 clutching	 his	 hair.	 His
dream	had	ended	in	a	curse.	No	one	wanted	him,	neither	his	dead	friend	nor	the
country	for	which	he	had	dared	the	cold	heights	of	Gandhara.	Neither	past	nor
future	 belonged	 to	 him.	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 man	 for	 whom	 he	 had	 lived,	 lying
dead	at	his	feet,	and	broke	into	sobs.	A	noble	Prince	should	not	be	lying	in	the
mud	 like	 this.	 It	 did	 not	 matter	 that	 Suyodhana	 had	 considered	 Karna	 a	 better
friend;	for	Aswathama,	there	was	no	one	left.	He	lifted	Suyodhana’s	head	onto
his	lap	and	hugged	his	friend’s	cold	body.
***
Far	 away,	 Bhishma	 still	 lay	 on	 his	 bed	 of	 arrows.	 Soon,	 the	 sighs	 of	 the
patriarch	 of	 the	 Kurus	 were	 drowned	 by	 the	 wailing	 of	 thousands	 of	 women
dragging	themselves	to	the	battlefield.	Some	were	old,	shrivelled	with	age	and
despair;	some	were	young,	at	the	prime	of	their	lives,	and	for	some,	life	had
been	about	to	blossom	before	the	war	had	cruelly	crushed	them.	Some	carried
babies	 in	 their	 arms;	 some	 had	 young	 children	 sobbing	 behind	 them.	 They
were	searching	for	the	bodies	of	their	dear	ones.	Shrieks	of	shock	rent	the	air
as	 mothers	 identified	 sons,	 widows	 found	 husbands,	 and	 sisters	 saw	 brothers
lying	headless,	limbless,	crushed	by	the	wheels	of	dharma.	As	the	lament	of	the
women	 rose	 to	 the	 heedless	 sky,	 vultures	 feeding	 on	 carrion	 flapped	 their
wings	 in	 anger	 and	 left.	 They	 perched	 on	 the	 leafless	 branches	 of	 trees	 and
watched,	 impatience	 in	 their	 glowing	 eyes.	 Jackals	 scurried	 away	 carrying
chunks	of	meat	and	flesh	they	had	torn	from	the	corpses.
Aswathama	 watched	 the	 scene	 with	 indifference.	 Life	 and	 death	 held	 no
meaning	for	him	now.

“There	he	is!	Kill	him!”	Dhaumya’s	voice	was	shrill	with	relief.
They	had	found	him	and	the	end	was	near.	Aswathama’s	warrior	instincts	made
him	 alert.	 No,	 he	 would	 not	 give	 up.	 Kripa	 had	 said	 it	 right.	 It	 was	 better	 to
surrender	and	work	again	patiently	towards	their	goal.	If	they	caught	him	now,
they	 would	 kill	 him	 before	 he	 could	 negotiate	 a	 surrender.	 He	 had	 to	 reach
Vyasa’s	ashram	quickly.
“Suyodhana,	I	have	to	leave	you	but	I	will	not	give	up.	Aswathama	will	prove	I
was	 always	 the	 better	 friend	 to	 you,	 not	 Karna.”	 Aswathama	 whispered	 to
Suyodhana’s	cold	body.	Gently	laying	the	Prince’s	head	on	the	ground,	he	rose
and	took	to	his	heels.
Dhaumya	 stood	 in	 his	 path.	 Aswathama	 swung	 his	 sword	 at	 the	 old	 Brahmin
without	breaking	his	stride,	turning	to	ensure	that	Dhaumya	lay	writhing	on	the
ground.	 He	 cursed	 when	 he	 saw	 the	 old	 man	 sitting	 dazed	 in	 the	 slush,
surrounded	 by	 his	 disciples.	 The	 priest	 had	 escaped	 his	 sword	 by	 a	 hair ’s
breadth.	Soldiers	ran	towards	him,	lances	at	the	ready.	Aswathama	fled	into	the
woods,	his	heart	pounding	against	his	ribs	like	a	rabbit	trapped	in	a	snare.
***
Draupadi	 sat	 without	 shedding	 a	 tear.	 Yudhishtra	 tried	 to	 console	 her	 but	 felt
overwhelmed	himself	by	the	loss	of	his	son;	his	words	lacked	coherence	and
meaning.	 The	 five	 bodies	 were	 placed	 before	 Draupadi,	 unrecognisable	 and
ghastly	in	death.	Her	sons	seemed	to	accuse	her,	their	eyes	staring	at	her	from
blackened	faces.
“Krishna	Madhava,	what	is	the	use	of	winning	this	war	when	we	have	lost	our
sons?	 They	 have	 followed	 Abhimanyu	 to	 the	 abode	 of	 Yama.	 Is	 this	 our
punishment	 for	 killing	 our	 sires	 and	 grandsires,	 Gurus	 and	 kin,	 through
deceit?	No,	do	not	tell	me	about	the	inevitability	of	death	and	the	immortality
of	 the	 soul,	 Krishna.	 When	 one’s	 own	 sons	 are	 dead,	 such	 words	 offer	 no
solace.	 They	 are	 consoling	 words	 to	 be	 uttered	 to	 others.	 Death	 is	 as	 real	 as
life,”	Yudhishtra	lamented,	hammering	his	forehead	with	his	fist.
Krishna	 stood	 nearby,	 unable	 to	 find	 words	 to	 console	 the	 man	 who	 had
become	 Emperor	 of	 Bharatavarsha	 just	 the	 previous	 day.	 Priests	 and	 other

well-wishers	stood	in	a	huddle,	not	knowing	what	to	do	or	say	to	console	their
Lord	and	the	woman	who	had	lost	all	her	five	sons	in	one	night.	The	Pandava
brothers	stood	alone,	crushed	by	the	weight	of	the	tragedy.
Finally	Yudhishtra	stood	up	and	called	for	his	mother.	Kunti	arrived.	She	felt
old	and	tired.	She	averted	her	eyes,	not	wanting	to	look	at	the	charred	visages
of	 her	 once-handsome	 and	 vital	 grandsons.	 Dead.	 There	 was	 nothing	 left
except	death.
In	a	voice	bereft	of	emotion,	Yudhishtra	asked	his	mother,	“Who	are	these	who
lie	stricken	here	by	death,	Mother?”
“Why	 do	 you	 torture	 me	 like	 this,	 Son?”	 Kunti	 asked,	 trying	 to	 suppress	 her
rising	sobs.
“Why	 were	 your	 grandsons,	 who	 had	 done	 no	 one	 any	 harm,	 punished	 like
this,	Mother?”
“It	was	their	fate,	Son...destiny...”
With	 a	 viciousness	 that	 startled	 the	 people	 around	 him,	 Yudhishtra	 shouted,
“Fate?	 No,	 do	 not	 blame	 fate	 for	 this,	 Mother.	 Remember	 the	 night	 at
Varanavata	when	we	trapped	five	Nishadas	and	their	mother	and	left	them	to	the
fire?	They	were	innocent,	like	our	sons,	yet	we	sacrificed	them	quoting	karma
and	dharma.	Well,	our	karma	has	caught	up	with	us.	The	 flames	that	took	the
Nishadas	have	taken	our	sons,	too.”
The	priests	coughed	and	cleared	their	throats.	Dhaumya	did	not	know	what	to
say	 to	 Yudhishtra.	 All	 he	 had	 wanted	 was	 a	 King	 who	 would	 be	 putty	 in	 his
hands,	 whom	 he	 could	 mould	 like	 a	 potter	 uses	 his	 wheel	 to	 shape	 a	 pot.	 He
wondered	 whether	 he	 had	 instead	 got	 brittle	 wood	 that	 crumbled	 at	 the	 first
touch.	“Dharma	is...”	he	began.
Draupadi	stood	up.	“Forgive	me,	Guru,	for	interrupting	your	wise	words.”	She
gave	a	bow	that	was	an	affront	in	its	elaborate	humility.
Turning	 away	 from	 the	 fulminating	 Guru,	 Draupadi	 said	 to	 her	 husbands,”	 I
want	the	man	who	killed	my	sons	to	be	brought	before	me,	dead	or	alive.	I	will
not	 allow	 the	 funeral	 of	 my	 sons	 to	 take	 place	 until	 the	 cursed	 Brahmin	 has

been	dragged	here.”
Yudhishtra	 tried	 to	 speak,	 but	 Draupadi	 raised	 her	 hands.	 “Indulge	 me,	 King,
one	last	time.	This	is	a	mother ’s	request.”
Arjuna	and	Bhima	did	not	wait.	They	ran	through	the	crowd	that	had	come	to
offer	 condolences	 and	 gawk	 at	 the	 misery	 of	 the	 royal	 household.	 A	 chariot
halted	 before	 them.	 Bhima	 took	 over	 the	 reins,	 from	 the	 charioteer.	 Arjuna
jumped	 in	 just	 as	 Nakula	 and	 Sahadeva	 came	 running,	 carrying	 Arjuna’s
weapons,	and	climbed	into	the	chariot	as	well.	The	four	brothers	were	ready	to
hunt	 down	 the	 killer	 of	 their	 sons.	 The	 chariot	 sped	 past	 the	 endless	 line	 of
carts,	horses,	donkeys	and	bullocks	carrying	the	dead	and	maimed.	Hundreds
of	 foot	 soldiers	 dragged	 themselves	 alongside	 the	 wounded.	 Bhima	 yelled	 at
the	bedraggled	survivors	of	the	great	war	to	make	way.
The	chariot	turned	off	onto	a	rough	forest	path.	As	they	swerved	and	swayed
along	 the	 winding	 path	 that	 led	 to	 the	 hills,	 Bhima	 wondered	 why	 there	 had
been	no	fuss	when	his	eldest	son,	Khatotkacha,	had	been	killed,	or	why	Arjuna
had	 not	 chased	 after	 the	 priests	 who	 had	 sacrificed	 Iravan.	 Then	 he	 shrugged
his	shoulders	and	whipped	the	horses.	It	was	not	for	him	to	think,	his	duty	was
to	do.	He	would	find	that	Brahmin	and	crush	his	skull	with	his	bare	hands	for
killing	his	son;	more	importantly,	for	causing	Draupadi	pain.	Aswathama	was
cursed	and	would	pay	a	heavy	price.
*****

77			JAYA
	
WHEN	ASWATHAMA	REACHED	VYASA’S	ashram,	the	morning	dew	still	clung	to	the

blades	of	grass.	The	air	felt	fresh	after	the	previous	day’s	rain	and	the	world
looked	as	beautiful	as	a	woman	after	a	bath.	A	gentle	breeze	carried	the	sound
of	chanting	and	 the	aroma	of	a	sacrificial	fire.	Smoke	rose	over	the	 ashram,
dancing	in	the	wind	and	rising	to	heaven,	carrying	the	offerings	of	mortal	men
to	the	immortals	who	had	no	needs.	Aswathama	reached	the	place	where	deer
lived	in	harmony	with	tigers,	and	snakes	with	mice,	covered	in	blood,	reeking
of	murder	and	sin.	Vyasa	eyed	Drona’s	son	without	pausing	his	chanting	of	the
Vedic	 mantras.	 Aswathama	 collapsed	 near	 the	 sacrificial	 fire.	 Once	 the
morning	 homa	 was	 completed,	 Vyasa	 asked	 his	 disciples	 to	 fetch	 herbs	 and
water	to	clean	the	Brahmin.
When	 Aswathama	 awoke,	 he	 was	 lying	 on	 a	 reed	 mat.	 For	 a	 moment	 he	 was
confused,	 uncertain	 where	 he	 was.	 Vyasa’s	 gentle	 eyes	 were	 looking	 at	 him.
Aswathama	 tried	 to	 sit	 upright	 but	 the	 sage	 gently	 pushed	 him	 down	 again,
saying,	“Rest,	my	son.”
“No,	I	am	a	sinner.	I	killed	sleeping	men.	I	have	committed	a	great	sin,”	cried
Aswathama.	“The	blood	of	innocents	is	on	my	hands.”
“Know	that	you	are	neither	the	slayer	nor	the	slain.	You	are	just	an	instrument
of	destiny.	Their	time	had	come.”
Vyasa’s	 words	 did	 not	 console	 Aswathama.	 He	 touched	 the	 gem	 on	 his
headcloth	and	wept.	His	father	had	been	right;	the	accursed	gem	had	turned	him
into	a	sinner.	For	a	fleeting	moment,	he	was	amused	by	the	thought.	How	could
a	gem	be	blamed	for	his	folly	and	sin?	He	heard	someone	moving	outside	his
hut;	 his	 warrior	 instincts	 surfaced	 and	 made	 him	 search	 for	 his	 sword.	 It	 had
vanished.

“This	 is	 a	 place	 made	 sacred	 by	 thought	 and	 sacrifice,	 son.	 Here,	 there	 is	 no
room	for	weapons.	Your	weapons	have	been	taken	far	from	the	ashram,”	said
Vyasa,	watching	Aswathama.
The	 Brahmin	 felt	 vulnerable	 without	 his	 weapons.	 When	 had	 he	 ever	 been
without	 them	 since	 his	 boyhood	 days?	 He	 was	 tempted	 to	 argue	 that	 his
enemies	were	at	his	heels,	but	one	look	at	Vyasa’s	dark	and	lined	face	silenced
the	 words	on	his	lips.	Aswathama	drifted	into	the	 sleep	 of	 the	damned.	When
the	 sun	 had	 baked	 the	 earth	 and	 was	 leaving	 the	 sky,	 Aswathama	 woke	 to	 the
distant	sound	of	an	approaching	chariot.
Vyasa	 sat	 cross-legged,	 singing	 verses	 in	 a	 melodious	 voice.	 His	 chief
disciples,	 Vaishampyana	 and	 Jaimini,	 sat	 before	 him,	 scribbling	 whatever	 the
sage	sang	on	palm	leaves.	The	verses	were	not	from	the	Vedas,	Aranyakas	or
Upanishads,	but	they	nevertheless	sounded	familiar.	Then	it	struck	Aswathama
that	Vyasa	was	singing	the	story	of	the	Kuru	dynasty.	He	was	singing	of	Drona,
his	 father,	 and	 how	 he	 arrived	 at	 the	 palace	 of	 Hastinapura	 with	 his	 wife	 and
little	son.	As	Aswathama	listened,	a	sadness	beyond	words	descended	on	him.
How	 different	 it	 could	 all	 have	 been,	 he	 thought.	 Through	 misty	 eyes,	 he
looked	at	the	sage	and	then	blinked	unbelievingly.	Who	was	sitting	near	Vyasa,
scribbling	faster	than	his	two	disciples?	He	had	an	elephant	face	and	pot	belly.
Was	 it	 Ganesha,	 son	 of	 Mahadeva?	 The	 God	 of	 wisdom	 and	 auspicious
beginnings?	 Aswathama	 blinked	 again	 and	 the	 vision	 disappeared.	 Perhaps	 it
was	 only	 the	 hallucinations	 of	 a	 tired	 mind.	 There	 were	 no	 beginnings	 left,
auspicious	or	otherwise,	for	Aswathama.	He	awaited	his	end.
It	 came	 sooner	 than	 he	 expected.	 The	 rumbling	 of	 the	 chariot	 grew	 louder,
breaking	 the	 serene	 silence	 of	 the	 ashram	 and	 scaring	 the	 pigeons	 that	 were
pecking	 the	 ground	 for	 grain.	 Four	 men	 jumped	 out	 of	 the	 chariot	 carrying
glistening	swords,	spiked	maces	and	tall	bows.	They	were	messengers	of	death.
“Worthy	men,	 do	not	defile	this	 ashram	 with	 instruments	of	violence.	Step	in
leaving	your	thoughts	of	revenge,	malice	and	wrath	at	the	entrance,	along	with
your	dusty	shoes,”	Jaimini,	Vyasa’s	disciple	said	with	hands	folded	in	pranam.
The	Pandavas	hesitated.	They	could	hear	Vyasa	singing	his	slokas	and	only	the
sound	 of	 a	 writing	 stencil	 scratching	 on	 a	 palm	 leaf	 broke	 the	 silence	 of	 the
ashram.

Aswathama	 looked	 at	 Vyasa	 in	 desperation.	 Why	 had	 he	 not	 intervened	 to
broker	peace?	What	was	more	important	than	a	Brahmin’s	life?	But	there	was
no	 break	 in	 the	 sage’s	 flow	 of	 words.	 Aswathama	 desperately	 searched	 for
some	 weapon.	 He	 would	 not	 go	 down	 without	 a	 fight.	 His	 gaze	 rested	 on	 the
long,	 sharp	 Kusha	 grass	 piled	 in	 a	 corner.	 It	 was	 as	 sharp	 as	 any	 sword.	 His
father	 had	 made	 him	 practise	 with	 it	 before	 he	 graduated	 to	 real	 swords.	 He
grabbed	 a	 pile	 of	 Kusha	 grass	 and	 quickly	 shoved	 it	 into	 the	 sacrificial	 fire.
Their	 tips	 blazed	 into	 flames.	 Aswathama	 withdrew	 one	 burning	 blade	 and
threw	it	at	Arjuna,	piercing	his	hand	like	a	dart.
“Don’t	 move,	 or	 I	 will	 finish	 you	 all.	 This	 is	 a	 Brahmastra	 and	 I	 know	 the
secret	 chants	 that	 will	 make	 it	 destroy	 the	 world.”	 The	 words	 sounded
ridiculous	even	to	his	own	ears.
Arjuna	 laughed	 and	 drew	 his	 bowstring	 taut.	 Aswathama	 saw	 death	 staring	 at
him	from	the	tip	of	Arjuna’s	arrow.	He	threw	another	blade	of	flaming	grass.
Vyasa	 stopped	 chanting	 and	 rose	 to	 stand	 facing	 Arjuna.	 Arjuna	 lowered	 his
bow,	 ashamed	 that	 he	 had	 thought	 of	 murder	 in	 the	 holy	 precincts	 of	 the
ashram.	 He	 would	 get	 the	 Brahmin	 once	 he	 stepped	 out.	 There	 would	 be	 no
mercy	for	the	accursed	man.
Aswathama	fell	to	his	knees	before	Vyasa,	sobbing.	The	flaming	Kusha	leaves
hissed	in	protest	as	they	turned	to	ash.
“Son,	go	with	them.	Surrender	and	accept	your	punishment	with	grace.	Let	the
madness	end	with	you.	The	world	has	suffered	enough.	Be	your	father ’s	son.”
The	 sage’s	 words	 broke	 Aswathama.	 He	 had	 never	 lived	 up	 to	 his	 father ’s
expectations.	 Instead,	 he	 had	 brought	 eternal	 shame	 to	 Drona’s	 name.	 He	 felt
Bhima’s	 rough	 hands	 on	 his	 neck	 and	 the	 anger	 in	 Arjuna	 as	 he	 pushed	 him
into	the	chariot	and	tied	him	up	like	a	goat	for	sacrifice.	As	the	chariot	left	the
ashram	 and	 swayed	 its	 way	 to	 Kurukshetra,	 he	 saw	 thick	 curls	 of	 smoke
blacken	 the	 skies.	 The	 funeral	 pyres	 were	 burning	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 holy
Ganga,	following	eighteen	days	of	carnage	in	the	name	of	dharma.	He	wished
he	had	cremated	Suyodhana.
***

Dhritarashtra	led	the	procession	of	mourners	from	the	palace.	He	did	not	ride
in	a	chariot	or	palanquin,	instead	he	walked,	his	cane	tapping	a	sharp	rhythm
on	the	ground.	Beside	him	walked	Gandhari,	her	arm	in	his.	For	once,	the	old
King	 was	 leading	 her.	 Behind	 them,	 thousands	 of	 women	 of	 noble	 birth
walked,	vacant	looks	in	their	dry	eyes.	They	did	not	belong	to	the	first	wave	of
mourners,	the	wives	and	mothers	of	the	common	soldiers	whose	deaths	meant
poverty	 and	 starvation	 for	 their	 families.	 These	 women	 of	 noble	 birth	 had
never	 ventured	 out	 of	 the	 palace	 without	 being	 carried	 in	 palanquins	 and
guarded	 by	 servants;	 they	 had	 never	 set	 foot	 outside	 except	 to	 visit	 various
shrines	 in	 temples.	 For	 them,	 life	 had	 been	 a	 series	 of	 days	 where	 they
competed	 with	 each	 other	 to	 parade	 their	 resplendent	 clothes	 and	 ornaments.
They	could	not	comprehend	the	reality	of	the	dreary	life	of	widows	they	were
now	 compelled	 to	 lead.	 With	 the	 death	 of	 their	 husbands,	 they	 had	 become
inauspicious,	 ill	 omens	 to	 be	 shunned	 on	 all	 happy	 occasions.	 They	 were
required	 to	 shave	 the	 beautiful	 tresses	 they	 had	 spent	 hours	 grooming,	 and
shun	silk	clothes	for	coarse	cotton.	They	would	be	given	a	fistful	of	rice	every
day,	 which	 they	 would	 cook	 themselves,	 as	 an	 act	 of	 charity	 by	 their	 sons	 or
brothers.	No	bangles	would	jingle	on	their	slender	wrists	or	soft	sandals	grace
their	lotus	feet.	They	were	beggars	in	their	own	homes.	Of	course,	there	was	a
choice.	 They	 could	 choose	 to	 be	 satis	 by	 jumping	 into	 the	 funeral	 pyres	 of
their	 husbands	 and	 be	 worshipped	 thereafter.	 Many	 preferred	 to	 embrace	 this
inhumane	custom	rather	than	spend	the	rest	of	their	lives	in	the	dark	corners	of
their	 mansions,	 crouching	 like	 spiders,	 despised	 by	 all,	 praying	 for	 release
from	 their	 misery.	 They	 had	 loved	 life	 and	 lived	 it	 with	 zest.	 Now	 they	 were
outcasts.
Sanjaya,	 the	 scribe,	 helped	 Dhritarashtra	 and	 Gandhari	 to	 where	 their	 dead
sons	lay.	Gandhari	did	not	weep	when	he	identified	for	her	each	of	her	sons	by
name.	 The	 Pandavas	 walked	 behind	 their	 Uncle	 and	 Aunt,	 unable	 to	 speak	 a
word.	 The	 horror	 of	 what	 they	 had	 done	 slowly	 sank	 into	 their	 minds.
Dhritarashtra	touched	each	son’s	face,	sometimes	smiling	as	his	fingers	found
the	 taut	 firmness	 of	 muscles	 in	 his	 dead	 sons’	 limbs.	 When	 they	 reached
Sushasana,	 Sanjaya	 could	 not	 speak.	 Suyodhana’s	 younger	 brother	 was	 lying
with	 his	 broad	 chest	 slashed	 open,	 yet	 the	 look	 of	 defiance	 had	 not	 left	 his
handsome,	dissolute	face.	Finally,	Sanjaya	whispered,	“Sushasana.”
“Bhima,”	Dhritarashtra	said	in	a	barely	audible	voice.	The	giant	Pandava	came

forward	and	bowed,	saying,	“Here	I	am,	Uncle.”
The	 old	 King	 leaned	 forward,	 gripping	 the	 lion-headed	 gold	 handle	 of	 his
cane.	He	quietly	said	to	the	man	who	had	killed	most	of	his	sons,	“Nephew,	to
kill	an	opponent	in	war	is	Kshatriya	dharma,	but	to	drink	his	blood?”
Bhima	shuffled	his	feet	and	looked	at	his	brothers	for	help.	He	was	a	man	of
action,	 never	 comfortable	 with	 words.	 He	 did	 not	 know	 why	 he	 had	 done	 it,
except	to	please	Draupadi,	who	never	treated	him	like	a	grown	man.	When	he
saw	that	even	Yudhishtra,	who	knew	all	about	dharma,	would	not	come	to	his
aid,	he	stuttered,	“Uncle,	I	did	not	drink	it.	I...I	just	wet	my	lips...”
Bhima	looked	around	and	saw	the	horror	on	people’s	faces.	He	wondered	what
he	 had	 said	 that	 was	 so	 wrong.	 Dhritarashtra	 put	 a	 hand	 on	 Bhima’s	 bowed
head	 and	 then	 walked	 away.	 The	 other	 Pandavas	 would	 not	 even	 look	 at	 him.
He	 had	 won	 them	 the	 war	 by	 killing	 all	 the	 Kauravas	 with	 his	 brute	 strength,
but	everyone	praised	Arjuna.	He	was	happy	with	a	full	stomach	and	a	place	to
sleep,	 but	 when	 Draupadi	 had	 not	 spoken	 a	 word	 of	 praise	 for	 what	 he	 had
done,	it	had	hurt.	He	wondered	why	no	one	remembered	the	death	of	his	son,
Khatotkacha.	For	a	moment	he	wondered	where	Hidumbi	was	and	felt	a	pang
of	 guilt.	 Perhaps	 Yudhishtra	 would	 allow	 him	 to	 go	 and	 see	 her	 once	 in	 a
while,	 now	 that	 he	 had	 won	 the	 kingdom.	 They	 won	 the	 war	 because	 dharma
was	 on	 their	 side.	 Krishna	 had	 said	 he	 was	 just	 an	 instrument	 when	 he	 had
asked	about	the	fairness	of	hitting	Suyodhana	below	the	waist	after	the	duel	that
felled	 his	 cousin.	 There	 was	 no	 need	 to	 feel	 any	 guilt,	 he	 assured	 himself.	 If
only	Draupadi	would	acknowledge	his	devotion.
“Bhima,	you	seem	to	be	thinking	a	lot,”	Krishna	said	as	he	hurried	past	him.
Bhima	smiled	amiably	at	his	friend	and	wondered	again	why	his	brothers	had
looked	so	horrified	when	he	had	said	he	had	only	tasted	Sushasana’s	blood,	not
drunk	it.	Why	couldn’t	people	say	clearly	what	they	wanted	from	him?	He	saw
six	 guards	 carrying	 along	 a	 life-sized	 iron	 statue	 on	 their	 shoulders,
staggering	under	its	weight.	Bhima	blinked	in	disbelief.	The	statute	resembled
him.	Where	had	Krishna	found	it?
Dhritarashtra	stood	near	Suyodhana’s	body.	Bhima	saw	his	usually	composed
aunt’s	lips	tremble	with	emotion	and	felt	uneasy.	The	soldiers	quietly	placed	the

statue	 behind	 Dhritarashtra,	 wiping	 the	 sweat	 from	 their	 faces.	 Krishna
gestured	for	silence.	Dhritarashtra	turned	sharply	and	asked,	“Who	is	it	behind
me?	Is	it	Bhima?”
Krishna	gesticulated	towards	Bhima	to	answer.	“Yes,	Uncle,	it	is	I.”
“I	am	proud	of	you,	my	son.	You	are	the	only	one	equal	to	me	in	strength	of
limb.	 I	 hold	 no	 grudge	 against	 you	 for	 what	 you	 have	 done.	 You	 are	 a	 real
Kshatriya.	Come,	hug	me.	Let	me	feel	your	strong	hands	and	shoulders	that	are
as	hard	as	stone.”
Dhritarashtra	 spread	 his	 arms	 wide.	 The	 cane	 fell	 to	 the	 ground.	 Bhima	 felt
elated.	For	the	first	time	in	his	life	someone	other	than	the	Sutas	and	Magadhas,
who	were	paid	mercenaries,	was	praising	him.	He	stepped	forward	but	Krishna
put	 out	 a	 restraining	 hand,	 puzzling	 him.	 Krishna	 gestured	 to	 the	 soldiers	 to
move	the	statute	so	that	Dhritarashtra	could	touch	it.
Dhritarashtra	tightly	hugged	the	iron	statue.	The	old	King’s	hands	became	taut
and	the	nerves	in	his	neck	vibrated	with	effort	as	he	grit	his	teeth.	With	a	crack,
the	statue	that	had	taken	six	soldiers	to	carry,	snapped	like	a	twig.	All	around,
people	watched	in	stunned	silence	as	the	statue	fell	and	Dhritarashtra	let	out	a
roar	of	rage.	“Pandu,	see	who	should	have	been	King!	I	have	killed	your	son
with	my	bare	hands.	I	have	killed	the	one	who	smashed	my	Suyodhana’s	thighs
and	drank	my	Sushasana’s	blood.”
Iron	 pieces	 had	 pierced	 Dhritarashtra’s	 chest	 and	 he	 was	 bleeding	 profusely.
Sanjaya	rushed	to	wipe	away	the	blood,	but	Dhritarashtra	pushed	him	away.	“I
am	a	Kshatriya,	not	an	old	maid.	Do	not	dare	to	fuss	over	me.	It	feels	good	to
have	Bhima’s	blood	on	me.”
Someone	 smothered	 a	 laugh	 and	 soon	 the	 soldiers,	 the	 priests	 and	 all	 those
standing	around,	were	laughing	at	the	blind	man’s	plight.
“It	 was	 not	 Bhima	 you	 crushed	 in	 your	 powerful	 arms,	 Kuru	 King,	 but	 the
statue	you	kept	in	your	room,”	Krishna	said,	a	smile	tugging	at	his	lips.
Dhritarashtra’s	 smile	 faded	 and	 he	 fell	 to	 the	 ground	 like	 a	 limp	 rag.	 He	 had
lost	 his	 last	 gamble	 to	 gain	 respect	 as	 a	 Kshatriya.	 They	 had	 outwitted	 him,

making	him	appear	a	spiteful	old	fool.	He	touched	Suyodhana’s	cold	body	and
wept.
Bhima	went	to	sit	beside	the	old	man	who	had	wanted	to	crush	him	to	death	a
few	moments	before.	As	usual	he	could	not	find	any	words	but	he	could	feel
his	uncle’s	pain.	As	a	warrior,	he	admired	the	strength	in	his	uncle’s	arms.	He
took	Dhritarashtra’s	wrinkled	hand	in	his	own	and	placed	it	on	his	head.
“Who	is	it?	Bhima?”	Dhritarashtra	asked,	touching	the	Pandava’s	face.	Bhima
grunted	in	reply.	Dhritarashtra	put	his	hands	on	Bhima’s	head	and	caressed	it.
Bhima	knew	Dhritarashtra	was	asking	for	forgiveness.	He	said	in	a	low	voice
which	only	the	two	of	them	heard,	“It	was	war,	Uncle.”
“I	know	you	were	just	the	mace	in	the	hands	of	others.	I	hold	nothing	against
you.	We	are	so	alike.”
Bhima	 blinked,	 not	 understanding	 what	 his	 blind	 uncle	 was	 saying,	 but
somehow	it	made	more	sense	than	whatever	Yudhishtra	had	said.
“Krishna!”	 Gandhari,	 who	 had	 not	 spoken	 a	 word,	 nor	 shed	 a	 tear	 since	 her
arrival	on	the	battlefield,	called	the	Yadava.
Krishna	moved	forward	and	bowed.	“Pranam,	Devi	Gandhari.”
“Have	 you	 got	 the	 answer	 to	 my	 question?	 Why	 was	 not	 even	 my	 Vikarna
spared?”
“Yes,	he	spoke	up	against	Duryodhana	at	the	dice	game,	but	when	war	came,	he
did	not	side	with	dharma.”
“That	 is	 your	 answer,	 Krishna?	 Was	 he	 not	 doing	 his	 duty,	 by	 supporting	 his
elder	brother	in	the	war?”
Krishna	 did	 not	 reply.	 He	 shuffled	 his	 feet	 restlessly,	 wishing	 this	 meeting
would	end.
“Yadava,	your	dharma	brought	misery,	war	and	death	to	Bharatavarsha.	Your
dharma	 made	 brother	 fight	 brother,	 cousin	 fight	 cousin;	 it	 pitted	 nephew

against	 uncle	 and	 father	 against	 son.	 Can	 you	 not	 hear	 the	 wailing	 of	 the
widows	and	the	weeping	of	children?	The	Grand	Sire	of	the	Kurus	lies	on	his
deathbed	 of	 arrows,	 shot	 by	 his	 favourite	 great-nephew,	 Arjuna.	 You	 did	 not
have	the	heart	to	spare	us	even	one	son,	not	even	Vikarna?
“And	what	did	your	dharma	earn	the	Pandavas?	Their	sons	are	dead	and	you
have	gifted	them	consciences	riddled	with	guilt	for	killing	their	kin	in	the	most
unfair	 manner.	 Will	 Yudhishtra	 sleep	 peacefully	 and	 not	 be	 haunted	 by	 his
deceitful	words	that	killed	his	Guru?	Will	Bhima	ever	stop	thinking	about	his
Rakshasa	son?	How	miserable	you	have	made	Arjuna’s	life	for	what	he	did	to
Karna!	I	pity	Kunti.	My	sons	are	martyrs,	but	her	sons	are	merely	puppets	who
will	be	cursed	in	this	life	and	thereafter.	I	could	have	forgiven	you	everything,
even	the	unfair	killing	of	Suyodhana,	if	you	had	shown	some	kindness	to	my
blind	 husband.	 But,	 for	 making	 a	 man	 sunk	 in	 grief	 at	 the	 death	 of	 his	 sons
look	 a	 fool;	 for	 making	 his	 grief	 and	 blindness	 the	 object	 of	 ridicule,	 you
deserve	the	worst.”
Gandhari’s	face	had	lost	its	dignified	beauty.	No	one	dared	to	look	at	her.	Her
sharp	 words	 pierced	 the	 shocked	 silence	 as	 she	 uttered	 a	 terrible	 curse.
“Yadava,	for	making	a	mockery	of	all	that	is	fair	and	true,	for	bloodshed	and
misery,	 for	 the	 violence	 you	 have	 unleashed,	 for	 confusing	 people	 about
dharma	and	adharma,	I	curse	you.	As	a	mother	who	has	lost	all	her	sons,	for
the	sake	of	all	mothers	who	have	lost	their	sons	in	your	war	of	dharma,	for	the
widows	 who	 have	 lost	 their	 husbands,	 and	 the	 children	 who	 have	 lost	 their
fathers,	 I	 curse	 you.	 May	 your	 tribe	 butcher	 each	 other	 to	 death	 and	 cousins
turn	on	each	other.	May	your	city	be	destroyed	and	buried.	Your	devotees	claim
you	 have	 come	 to	 save	 the	 world,	 but	 when	 the	 time	 comes,	 you	 will	 not	 be
able	to	save	even	your	city.	You	will	not	be	able	to	save	your	wives.	You	will
not	even	be	able	to	save	yourself.	May	you	die	an	inglorious	death,	hunted	like
an	animal!”
The	priests	broke	into	an	uproar	but	Krishna	raised	his	hand	to	silence	them.
“Mother,	 I	 accept	 your	 curse	 with	 folded	 hands.	 I	 am	 not	 an	 exception	 to	 the
laws	of	karma.	I	claim	no	divinity	other	than	the	realization	that	divinity	rests
in	me,	as	it	does	in	all	beings.	I	know	it,	others	do	not.	The	wheel	of	dharma
will	 turn;	 it	 is	 the	 wheel	 of	 time.	 Like	 the	 ritus,	 it	 too,	 will	 change.	 What	 is
dharma	 today	 may	 be	 considered	 adharma	 tomorrow.	 This	 war	 would	 have
happened	 without	 me,	 but	 it	 would	 have	 stretched	 on,	 bringing	 even	 more

misery.	 I	 have	 broken	 rules,	 like	 guards	 who	 chase	 thieves	 through	 a	 busy
market	 place;	 they	 break	 a	 few	 wares	 here	 and	 there,	 topple	 an	 innocent
vendor ’s	cart	and	jeopardise	his	livelihood	by	chasing	the	thief.	Those	who	do
not	know	what	the	thief	stole,	may	conclude	that	the	guards	were	heartless	to
the	 innocent	 pedestrians	 they	 pushed	 out	 of	 their	 way,	 or	 to	 the	 vegetable
vendor	whose	cart	they	upturned	in	their	chase.
Yet,	catching	the	thief	is	their	duty.	Without	the	guards,	the	city	would	collapse
into	chaos.	I	am	the	guard	who	has	broken	the	rules	to	restore	order.	I	am	the
Preserver.	Time	is	the	King	and	he	may	turn	against	me.	I	accept	it	as	part	of
my	 duty.	 I	 am	 neither	 angered	 nor	 happy.	 That	 is	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 universe,
which	I	am.	But	the	laws	of	karma	bind	me	too.	I	accept	your	curses	or	your
blessings	with	humility.	Mother,	forgive	me	for	what	I	have	done.	But	I	would
do	it	all	again,	without	pleasure	or	pain,	for	that	is	my	dharma.”
Gandhari	 turned	 away	 from	 Krishna.	 She	 was	 past	 caring	 what	 he	 meant	 by
those	 words.	 Her	 world	 lay	 shattered	 and	 all	 hope	 had	 died.	 A	 lifetime	 of
struggle	had	led	her	from	disaster	to	tragedy,	making	her	bitter.	She	suddenly
thought	of	Bhishma	lying	on	his	bed	of	arrows,	waiting	to	die.	She	shuddered.
He	 had	 been	 responsible	 for	 shattering	 her	 sheltered	 life	 in	 Gandhara	 and
bringing	 her	 here	 to	 marry	 a	 blind	 man.	 How	 different	 life	 would	 have	 been
had	Bhishma’s	invasion	never	happened.	She	would	have	married	a	Gandharan
noble	 and	 lived	 in	 the	 hills.	 Instead,	 here	 she	 stood	 in	 the	 temple	 of	 dharma,
where	her	sons	lay	dead	and	her	husband	was	mocked	at	for	his	blindness.	She
put	a	hand	on	her	husband’s	arm	and	whispered,	“It	is	time	for	the	cremation.
Please	give	the	order.”
Dhritarashtra	stood	up	and	said	to	Gandhari,	“Just	for	one	day,	why	not	open
your	blindfold?	Do	you	not	wish	to	see	your	sons?”
Despite	herself,	the	silk	cloth	which	hid	Gandhari’s	eyes	from	the	horrors	of
the	world	became	wet	with	 tears.	 “I	do	 not	wish	to	see	 them	as	they	are	now.
Every	day	I	have	seen	them	in	my	mind’s	eye,	so	handsome	and	strong.	Let	that
picture	remain	forever	with	me.	Nor	do	I	wish	to	see	anything	that	is	denied	to
you.”
“Gandhari,	 you	 are	 crying?	 You,	 the	 strongest	 of	 us	 all?	 If	 you	 cry,	 what	 is
left?	This	day	will	pass.”

Gandhari	 found	 solace	 in	 her	 husband’s	 strength,	 their	 usual	 roles	 reversed.
His	 strong	 hands	 on	 hers	 were	 comforting.	 She	 leaned	 on	 him	 and	 wept,	 not
caring	who	stared	at	them	or	who	whispered.	They	were	no	longer	the	royal
couple	but	just	two	sightless	people	standing	there	with	their	dead	sons	at	their
feet.
Gandhari	 regained	 her	 composure.	 She	 sensed	 Bhima’s	 presence	 near	 them.
Hatred	threatened	to	overcome	her.	Taking	 a	deep	breath	she	said	 to	the	man
who	had	killed	her	sons,	“Bhima,	go	to	your	wife.	Comfort	her.	She	has	lost	all
her	sons.”
Bhima	 touched	 their	 feet.	 Dhritarashtra	 put	 a	 hand	 on	 his	 nephew’s	 head	 and
said,	“Ayushman	Bhava.”
Bhima	retreated	silently,	leaving	them	to	deal	with	their	misery.	Khatotkacha’s
face	flashed	through	his	mind	again.	As	he	walked	towards	his	grieving	wife,
he	 saw	 Aswathama,	 tied	 and	 kneeling	 on	 the	 ground.	 Nakula	 and	 Sahadeva
stood	with	their	swords	pressed	to	the	Brahmin’s	neck.	Aswathama	raised	his
head	to	look	at	Bhima,	his	eyes	devoid	of	emotion.	The	gem	on	his	headcloth
sparkled	 shone	 in	 the	 sun.	 Draupadi	 had	 coveted	 it	 once.	 Bhima	 rushed	 to
Aswathama	 and	 kicked	 his	 face.	 When	 the	 Brahmin	 fell	 over,	 Bhima	 pulled
away	the	gem	and	ran	towards	Draupadi.
“Draupadi,	 here	 it	 is!	 This	 is	 what	 you	 wanted,”	 he	 said,	 showing	 her	 the
glittering	gem.
Draupadi	looked	at	him,	pity	in	her	eyes.	“Give	it	to	Yudhishtra,	Bhima.	It	will
look	well	in	his	crown.”
Bhima	 did	 not	 understand	 why	 she	 sounded	 so	 bitter	 when	 she	 had	 said
‘crown’.	Then	his	gaze	fell	on	his	slain	son’s	body,	being	carried	by	bearers	to
the	cremation	pyre.	He	blinked	to	hold	back	his	tears.	He	had	never	been	close
to	his	son	but	when	he	saw	the	finality	of	everything,	the	horror	of	war	struck
him	 with	 overwhelming	 force.	 Draupadi	 began	 wailing	 like	 any	 common
woman;	his	beautiful	Draupadi,	who	had	always	loved	Arjuna	more	than	any	of
them	but	sometimes	murmured	Karna’s	name	in	her	sleep;	his	Draupadi,	whom
he	could	never	please,	no	matter	what	he	did,	whether	it	was	facing	the	perils
of	the	forest	and	hordes	of	Rakshasas	to	get	her	Sougandika	flowers	just	to	see

her	 smile,	 or	 carrying	 her	 on	 his	 strong	 shoulders	 through	 the	 rough	 forest
paths	while	she	laughed	and	shared	secrets	with	Arjuna	walking	beside	them.
Bhima	looked	at	the	gem	he	had	taken	from	Aswathama.	He	did	not	know	what
to	do	with	it.	Yudhishtra	was	standing	with	Dhaumya,	arguing	about	something.
The	 bearers	 were	 bringing	 the	 bodies	 to	 cremate.	 He	 stood	 alone	 on	 the
battlefield.	 The	 gem	 in	 his	 hands	 sparkled,	 but	 looked	 as	 useless	 as	 a	 pebble.
Finally,	he	walked	over	to	Yudhishtra	and	thrust	it	into	his	hand.
“What	 is	 this?”	 Yudhishtra	 asked,	 irritated	 at	 being	 interrupted	 when	 he	 was
trying	to	seek	the	meaning	of	so	much	disaster	from	Guru	Dhaumya.
“Draupadi	says	it	will	look	good	in	your	crown,”	Bhima	said	and	walked	away.
Suddenly,	Dhritarashtra’s	voice	rose	over	the	anguished	whispers	and	wailing.
“No!	 Not	 as	 per	 their	 caste,	 not	 as	 per	 their	 position.”	 The	 blind	 King	 stood
leaning	on	his	cane,	but	his	voice	was	clear	with	authority.
Sanjaya	 whispered	 something	 in	 his	 ear	 and	 Dhitarashtra	 shouted	 in	 rage,
“This	 is	 an	 order	 from	 the	 King	 of	 Hastinapura.	 There	 will	 be	 no	 separate
cremation	 rituals	 as	 per	 caste.	 Death	 is	 the	 final	 truth,	 and	 truth	 has	 no	 caste,
you	 fool!	 Tell	 Dhaumya	 that	 this	 blind	 man	 will	 take	 on	 all	 the	 sin	 for	 this
decision.	 Let	 me	 rot	 in	 naraka	 for	 cremating	 together	 the	 Brahmins,	 the
Kshatriyas,	 the	 Shudras,	 and	 countless	 others	 who	 lost	 their	 lives	 in	 this	 war.
They	fought	together	and	they	will	go	to	the	next	world	together.	I	do	not	care
whether	 they	 belonged	 to	 the	 Southern	 Confederate,	 the	 Pandavas	 or
Rakshasas.	They	will	all	burn	with	my	Suyodhana.”
Sanjaya	 whispered	 something,	 bowing	 in	 deference.	 “If	 they	 do	 not	 have
enough	firewood,	tear	down	the	palace.	Cut	the	silk	curtains,	take	out	the	soft
carpets	and	feather	beds.	No	one	will	be	buried	like	swine.	All	the	rituals	for
the	dead	will	be	done	as	per	the	Vedas.	If	you	do	not	know	their	fathers’	names
to	speak	in	the	ritual	of	the	dead,	tell	the	Brahmins	to	say	my	name	as	the	Pitru
of	the	dead,	for	they	are	all	my	sons.”
The	 King	 turned	 to	 Yudhishtra.	 “You	 may	 have	 killed	 my	 sons	 and	 won,
Yudhishtra,	 but	 I	 am	 still	 the	 King.	 I	 was	 always	 the	 King	 and	 I	 will	 be	 till	 I
choose	not	to	be,	or	till	death	claims	me.	If	you	wish	to	overrule	me,	you	will

have	to	fight	this	old	man	and	kill	me...”
“King,	it	will	be	as	you	command.	Your	wishes	will	be	honoured.”	Yudhishtra
bowed	to	his	uncle	before	Dhaumya	could	say	anything.
As	 soldiers	 ran	 to	 execute	 the	 royal	 order,	 Dhaumya	 burned	 with	 anger.	 If
Yudhishtra	was	going	to	behave	like	this	in	the	future,	transgressing	all	caste
rules	 and	 flouting	 every	 tradition,	 why	 had	 they	 brought	 down	 Suyodhana?
This	country	always	had	nasty	surprises.	When	would	they	get	the	perfect	King
who	would	follow	the	shastras	as	he	taught	them?	His	work	was	so	incomplete.
The	priests	waited	for	the	Pandavas	near	the	river.	The	five	pyres	were	ready.
Draupadi	leaned	on	Arjuna	as	they	walked.
“Brother,	shall	we	kill	this	sinner?”	Nakula	asked	Arjuna.
Before	Arjuna	could	answer,	Kunti	said	in	a	weary	voice	“Stop	the	killing,	my
sons.	Release	the	Brahmin.”
Draupadi	 stood	 up	 straight,	 the	 flames	 in	 her	 heart	 alight	 once	 more.	 “Don’t
kill	 Aswathama,	 Mother?”	 she	 said	 to	 Kunti	 in	 disbelief.	 “I	 have	 lost	 all	 my
sons	and	you	speak	of	mercy?	Mother,	it	is	different	for	you,	you	have	not	lost
any	 of	 your	 sons.	 You	 will	 never	 understand	 what	 a	 mother	 feels	 when
she..loses...her	sons.”
Kunti	 tried	 to	 hug	 her	 daughter-in-law,	 tears	 choking	 her	 throat.	 “Daughter,
they	were	my	grandsons.”
“No,	don’t	come	near	me.	You	poisoned	your	sons’	minds	and	created	this	war.
You	made	me	marry	your	five	sons	and	ruined	me.”
“Draupadi,”	 Yudhishtra	 said	 gently,	 “we	 have	 all	 lost.	 You	 must	 not	 speak	 to
our	mother	in	that	way.	Sahadeva,	free	the	Brahmin.”
Sahadeva	reluctantly	cut	the	cords	that	bound	Aswathama,	but	the	Brahmin	did
not	move.
“Let	her	speak,	Son.	I	do	understand	what	it	feels	like	to	lose	a	son.”

Arjuna	 was	 startled	 at	 these	 words	 but	 before	 he	 could	 react,	 Krishna	 moved
forward.	“Yudhishtra,	the	priests	are	ready.	The	cremation	must	be	done	before
sunset.”
“Son,	before	you	light	the	pyres	of	my	grandsons,	you	must	pray	for	my	dead
son,	too,”	Kunti	said,	gazing	into	the	distance.
“What	did	you	say,	Mother?”	Arjuna	cried,	rushing	towards	Kunti.
Draupadi	raised	her	head	and	stared	at	her	mother-in-law.
“Son,	make	arrangements	for	the	funeral	of	my	eldest	son,	Karna.”
An	uneasy	silence	descended.
“Mother,	 are	 you	 saying	 Karna	 was	 your	 son,	 the	 eldest?	 Then	 why	 did	 we
fight	 this	 war?	 If	 he	 was	 your	 eldest	 son,	 Karna	 should	 have	 been	 King.
Suyodhana	would	not	have	objected.”
“Karna	would	never	have	been	King,	Yudhishtra,	for	he	was	born	before	I	was
married.	I	have	carried	the	secret,	killing	myself	with	guilt,	dying	every	time
someone	 insulted	 him	 for	 his	 caste.	 On	 the	 day	 of	 your	 graduation,	 I
recognised	him	as	the	son	I	had	abandoned.	Only	Suyodhana	stood	up	for	him.
I	fainted	when	I	realised	my	firstborn	would	always	be	the	enemy	of	my	other
five	sons.	Before	the	war,	I	went	to	beg	him	to	leave	Suyodhana,	I	even	offered
him	 the	 empire.	 I	 tried	 to	 persuade	 him	 to	 come	 to	 our	 side	 so	 that	 my	 sons
would	 not	 fight	 each	 other.	 But,	 for	 Karna,	 no	 empire	 was	 greater	 than	 his
friendship	with	Suyodhana.	When	I	saw	he	would	not	relent,	I	begged	him	for
your	lives.	He	promised	me	he	would	spare	everyone,	except	Arjuna.	He	said
he	would	never	stray	from	the	path	of	dharma,	even	if	it	cost	him	his	life.”
“I	am	ashamed	to	call	you	mother,”	Yudhishtra	said	in	a	voice	that	made	Kunti
shudder.	“Your	secret	has	destroyed	so	many	lives.	I	would	have	given	up	my
claim,	 had	 I	 known	 Karna	 was	 your	 firstborn.	 The	 man	 whose	 thighs	 we	 so
shamelessly	broke	would	have	given	up	his	claim.	Why	did	we	fight	the	war?
Can	you	not	hear	the	cries	of	the	widows?	How	will	we	escape	their	curses?”
Yudhishtra	 turned	 to	 Krishna,	 “What	 dharma	 is	 this,	 my	 Lord?	 I	 fought	 a
reluctant	 war	 against	 my	 kin	 and	 killed	 lakhs	 of	 people	 for	 a	 war	 without

meaning.	 I,	 who	 never	 spoke	 an	 untruth	 in	 my	 life,	 lied	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 this
dharma	 and	 killed	 Guru	 Drona.	 At	 every	 turn	 of	 the	 war,	 we	 acted	 in	 a
despicable	manner.	I	consoled	myself	that	it	was	all	for	the	sake	of	dharma.	But
what	 dharma	 is	 this	 that	 brings	 tears,	 death	 and	 poverty	 to	 millions?	 What
dharma	 was	 I	 fighting	 for?	 I	 do	 not	 want	 this	 kingdom.	 I	 have	 stolen	 it	 from
Karna	 or	 perhaps	 from	 Suyodhana.	 I	 have	 stolen	 it	 from	 my	 uncle,
Dhritarashtra.	Bhishma	Pitamaha	was	himself	cheated	by	his	father.	We	Kurus
are	all	kulaheena.	We	have	always	been	and	shall	always	be,	mere	puppets.”
Krishna	tried	to	placate	Yudhishtra	but	his	wrath	had	already	turned	towards	his
mother.	“All	these	things	happened	only	because	this	woman	kept	her	terrible
secret	to	herself.	Let	no	woman	be	capable	of	keeping	a	secret	to	herself	for	so
long.”
“Now	 I	 understand	 why	 Karna	 spared	 our	 lives.	 To	 think	 we	 killed	 our	 own
brother	through	deceit!”	Arjuna	cried,	anguished.	Even	as	declared	foes	he	had
always	respected	Karna	as	a	warrior.	His	own	final	act	of	dishonour	seared	his
soul.	 “Krishna,	 I	 think	 of	 all	 those	 I	 have	 killed...my	 Guru,	 my	 Pitamaha,	 my
brother.	All	my	doubts	about	the	war	before	we	began	battle,	have	returned	to
cloud	my	mind.	I	was	dazzled	then	by	your	wisdom,	moved	by	your	Gita,	and
so	I	aimed	and	shot	where	you	pointed.	But	now,	how	will	I	close	my	eyes	in
peaceful	 sleep,	 my	 Lord?	 I	 am	 but	 a	 fool,	 I	 do	 not	 understand	 dharma.	 It	 is
beyond	 my	 grasp.	 Your	 wisdom	 eludes	 me	 and	 only	 the	 lamentations	 of
widows	assail	my	ears.	Oh,	what	have	I	done?”
Aswathama	 struggled	 to	 rise	 but	 fell	 to	 his	 knees	 in	 pain.	 Had	 he	 heard
Yudhishtra	 right,	 that	 Karna	 was	 Kunti’s	 eldest	 son?	 Karna	 could	 have	 been
Emperor,	 yet	 he	 had	 chosen	 to	 die	 fighting	 for	 his	 friend.	 He	 never	 betrayed
Suyodhana.	How	could	he	have	even	imagined	that	such	a	thought	could	live	in
Karna’s	 great	 heart?	 ‘Oh	 Shiva,	 what	 have	 I	 done?	 There	 is	 no	 sinner	 more
deserving	of	punishment	than	I.’
Aswathama	crawled	to	where	Suyodhana	lay,	finally	at	peace.	“Suyodhana,	the
kingdom	belonged	to	Karna,	yet	he	died	for	you.	You	were	right	about	him.”
There	was	no	answer.	His	friend	lay	in	eternal	rest,	his	body	as	cold	as	the	icy
waters	of	the	lake	he	had	hidden	in.
Draupadi	 wailed	 for	 her	 dead	 sons.	 No	 longer	 was	 she	 the	 wrathful	 woman

who	 wished	 to	 drink	 the	 blood	 of	 her	 opponents.	 She	 was	 just	 a	 mother,	 like
countless	others	who	had	sacrificed	their	sons	in	the	war	that	had	no	winners.
The	 Pandavas	 surrounded	 her,	 shielding	 her	 grief	 from	 the	 public	 gaze.
Krishna	stood	nearby,	trying	to	console	them	all,	but	for	once	his	words	gave
them	no	solace.
“Father!”	 A	 young	 woman	 pushed	 Aswathama	 away	 and	 fell	 on	 Suyodhana’s
still	 body.	 Lakshmana,	 Suyodhana’s	 daughter,	 had	 come	 with	 Balarama	 and
Bhanumati,	 but	 they	 were	 too	 late.	 Bhanumati	 stood	 frozen	 and	 dry-eyed,
gazing	down	at	the	man	she	had	loved	more	than	life	itself.	‘Why,	Suyo?	What
was	it	all	for	in	the	end?	You	are	gone...Kumara	is	gone...Hastinapura	is	gone!’
Her	heart	filled	with	unutterable	pain.
Balarama	looked	down	at	the	man	he	had	loved	as	a	son.	His	gaze	travelled	to
the	broken	thighs	and	blackened	legs.	Suddenly,	he	remembered	the	youngster
who	had	yearned	to	wield	the	mace,	to	whom	he	had	taught	the	art	of	weaponry.
He	 turned	 to	 his	 silent	 brother.	 “Krishna,	 what	 is	 this?	 How	 could	 you	 let
Bhima	hit	below	the	waist	to	kill	Suyodhana?	How	could	you	allow	Arjuna	to
kill	an	unarmed	Karna?	And	Drona...and	Bhishma?	Oh	my	brother,	adharma	is
the	only	victor	in	this	war.	So	many	people	dead	for	no	reason.”
“Dharma	has	its	own	reasons,	brother.”
Balarama	 bent	 down,	 trying	 to	 console	 Bhanumati	 and	 Lakshmana.	 They	 did
not	see	Aswathama	drag	himself	away.	More	and	more	people	assembled	in	a
circle	to	gawk	at	the	grief	of	the	royals.	An	old	man	came	forward.	He	looked
at	 the	 dead	 Crown	 Prince	 and	 then	 at	 the	 grieving	 women.”	 Is	dharma	 a	 war
fought	without	ethics	and	then	glorified?”	he	asked.
“Carvaka,	 the	 Maharishi,”	 someone	 whispered,	 half	 afraid,	 half	 horrified	 by
the	well-known	atheist’s	words.
“Blasphemy!	Tie	him	up!”	shouted	Dhaumya,	enraged.	Finally	he	had	found	a
target	he	could	direct	his	frustration	at	and	reassert	his	slipping	authority.	He
looked	towards	where	Krishna	stood	at	a	distance,	preoccupied	with	consoling
the	Pandavas.	He	had	to	act	before	the	Yadava	turned	his	attention	to	the	ruckus
the	atheist	was	causing.	Who	could	predict	what	Krishna	would	say?	He	might
just	smile	and	accept	Carvaka’s	accusations	with	humility	and	walk	away.	Then

what	 would	 happen	 to	 the	 careful	 stories	 Dhaumya	 had	 spread?	 Soldiers	 had
caught	hold	of	Carvaka.	Dhaumya	ordered,	“Burn	him	alive!”
Oil	was	poured	over	Carvaka	and	lit.	The	priests	chanted	mantras	as	they	burnt
the	man	who	had	spent	a	lifetime	tirelessly	working	among	the	people.	Finally,
Krishna	turned	his	head.	His	eyes	widened	in	horror	at	what	was	happening.	He
rushed	 to	 save	 the	 Maharishi	 but	 stopped	 short	 when	 he	 heard	 Dhaumya	 say,
“Carvaka	was	a	Rakshasa,	he	burned	in	the	fire	of	Brahmin	wrath.”
Krishna	 whipped	 out	 his	 Sudharshana,	 his	 eyes	 blazing	 at	 the	 Guru.	 But
Dhaumya	whispered	in	his	ear,	“Fire	purifies.	The	Rakshasa	is	lucky,	unlike	the
Nishada	 you	 killed	 with	 a	 stone.	 Carvaka	 has	 achieved	 moksha.”	 Ekalavya’s
face	 flashed	 in	 Krishna’s	 mind.	 If	 only	 he	 had	 killed	 Samba	 instead	 of
committing	 such	 a	 heinous	 crime.	 He	 stood	 paralysed,	 looking	 down	 at
Carvaka’s	charred	body.	The	Maharishi’s	fists	were	still	closed	in	defiance.
“Hare	 Krishna!	 The	 Lord	 has	 restored	 dharma	 and	 killed	 evil.	 Bow	 to	 the
Lord,	 avatar	 of	 Vishnu.	 Pray	 to	 him	 for	 your	 moksha,”	 Dhaumya	 shouted,
prostrating	himself	at	Krishna’s	feet.	There	were	murmurs	as	the	dazed	crowd
watched	the	group	of	priests	prostrate	themselves	at	Krishna’s	feet.	Then,	one
by	one,	they	too,	fell	to	their	knees	and	shouts	of	‘Hare	Krishna’	filled	the	air.
Aswathama	could	see	the	future	of	his	country	unfolding	before	him.	He	stood
up	warily.	His	friend	was	dead	and	he	had	achieved	nothing.	Their	dreams	had
vanished,	leaving	only	blood	and	tears.
“Did	he	mention	me	before	he	died,	Aswathama?”	The	Brahmin	blinked	away
his	 tears,	 unable	 to	 answer	 Bhanumati.	 How	 could	 he	 tell	 her	 that	 Suyodhana
had	spoken	only	of	Karna...and	him.	“Tell	me,	Aswathama.	Did	he	say	anything
at	all?”	Bhanumati	gazed	into	Aswathama’s	face,	then	her	shoulders	drooped.
“No...no...	of	course,	he	did	not.	It	was	always	Karna...only	Karna.	The	day	the
Suta	entered	Suyodhana’s	life,	he	was	cursed.”	Lakshmana’s	sobs	mingled	with
those	of	Draupadi	mourning	her	sons,	but	Bhanumati	stood	in	silence.	She	had
no	more	tears	left	to	shed.	There	was	no	meaning	left	to	anything.
Aswathama	began	to	laugh.	The	priests	stopped	their	chanting	to	stare	at	him.
The	Brahmin	laughed	as	if	he	would	die	of	mirth.	“You	fools!	You	poor,	stupid
fools!”	he	gasped,	clapping	his	hands	to	get	everyone’s	attention.	“Suyodhana

was	 a	 fool,	 Karna	 was	 a	 fool,	 and	 all	 you	 Pandavas	 are	 fools.	 You,	 Krishna,
you	too	are	a	fool,	as	am	I.	Can	you	not	see,	as	clear	as	the	sun	in	the	sky,	that
all	of	us	have	lost?	If	you	have	any	sense	left,	think…	who	has	won?”
“He	has	gone	insane,”	Yudhishtra	said	in	a	shocked	voice.
Aswathama	faced	Dhaumya.	“Wise	man…	you	are	the	only	wise	man	here.	You
have	 won,	 Guru.	 May	 the	 likes	 of	 you	 multiply	 and	 bless	 this	 country.”
Aswathama	bowed	and	then	turned	to	the	others.	“Fools,	all	of	us!	Think	who
has	won	this	war	of	dharma…	Think	and	think	again	until	you	understand.	Oh
my	 poor	 foolish	 countrymen!”	 He	 stood	 beside	 Suyodhana’s	 body	 and
whispered	in	despair,	“Oh,	you	King	of	fools!”	Aswathama	wept.
Yudhishtra	 walked	 to	 the	 stricken	 Brahmin	 and	 reached	 out	 a	 hand	 to	 touch
him,	 but	 Aswathama	 turned	 and	 fled	 into	 the	 forest.	 His	 words	 and	 mocking
laughter	would	echo	over	time.
*****

78			TASTE	OF	DHARMA
	
BHANUMATI	 LEFT	 THE	 HASTINAPURA	 PALACE	

for	 her	 childhood	 home
immediately,	 once	 the	 funeral	 rites	 for	 her	 husband	 were	 over.	 Gandhari	 and
Kunti’s	repeated	pleas	to	remain	had	no	effect	on	her.
Bhishma	died	on	the	day	Uttarayana	began.	He	remained	conscious	to	the	end
and	tried	to	warn	Yudhishtra	about	Dhritarashtra.	He	also	advised	him	how	to
rule	 without	 fear	 or	 favour.	 On	 the	 day	 of	 Sankranti,	 Gangadutta	 Devavrata
Bhishma	departed	his	earthly	body.	Yudhishtra	performed	the	last	rites	for	the
Pitamaha	of	the	Kurus.
On	 the	 night	 of	 the	 funeral,	 Kripa	 came	 to	 pay	 his	 respects,	 risking	 capture.
Yudhishtra	 asked	 his	 forgiveness	 for	 the	 war,	 surprising	 the	 maverick	 Guru.
The	usually	cynical	Kripa	broke	down	at	this	gesture	from	a	man	whose	son	he
had	 helped	 murder.	 Yudhishtra	 requested	 Kripa	 to	 accept	 the	 position	 of
Rajaguru,	 to	 guide	 him	 in	 the	 days	 ahead.	 Kripa	 bowed	 his	 head	 in
acquiescence,	humbled	at	last.
They	 found	 Vidhura	 sitting	 heartbroken	 near	 Bhishma’s	 funeral	 pyre.
Yudhishtra	lifted	up	his	uncle	and	took	him	to	live	in	the	palace.
While	immersing	the	ashes	of	Pitamaha	in	the	Ganga	on	the	third	day	after	his
death,	Yudhishtra	was	overcome	by	grief	and	guilt.	In	his	despair	he	attempted
suicide,	but	Bhima	and	Arjuna	restrained	him.	It	took	Krishna	the	better	part	of
the	day	to	focus	his	mind	on	the	nuances	of	dharma	and	rule	according	to	the
tenets	 of	 the	 smritis.	 But	 the	 next	 day	 dawned	 with	 the	 shocking	 news	 that
Yudhishtra	 would	 not	 assume	 the	 kingship.	 Instead,	 he	 went	 to	 see	 Vrishali,
Karna’s	grieving	widow.	Yudhishtra	asked	her	for	Karna’s	eight-year-old	son,
Vrishaketu,	 the	 only	 survivor	 in	 the	 next	 generation	 of	 Kurus,	 as	 the	 next
successor.	But	the	priests	decreed	that	Vrishaketu	was	ineligible	as	the	son	of	a
Suta	 mother.	 Heartbroken,	 Yudhishtra	 brought	 Vrishaketu	 to	 live	 with	 him,

instructing	Arjuna	to	turn	him	into	a	great	warrior,	as	befitted	the	son	of	Karna.
By	evening,	Yudhishtra	had	announced	that	Dhritarashtra	would	remain	King.
Later	 that	 night,	 an	 anguished	 Gandhari	 asked	 Dhritarashtra	 why	 he	 had
accepted	 his	 nephew’s	 generous	 offer.	 How	 could	 he	 rule	 in	 peace	 when
Suyodhana	 was	 dead?	 The	 old	 King	 gave	 a	 bitter	 laugh	 that	 frightened
Gandhari.	The	nobility	he	had	displayed	at	their	sons’	cremation	had	vanished,
in	 its	 place	 stood	an	angry	old	man	 with	 Shakuni’s	cunning	and	Suyodhana’s
determination.
The	next	day	he	called	for	Dhaumya,	to	discuss	matters	of	state.	The	Guru	was
sceptical	when	he	arrived	to	see	the	King.	Everything	had	gone	wrong	for	the
Guru	 after	 the	 war.	 Instead	 of	 a	 furious	 rebel-like	 Suyodhana,	 whom	 it	 was
easy	to	accuse	of	adharma,	he	found	Yudhishtra,	the	man	he	had	nurtured	and
announced	as	the	epitome	of	dharma.
“Guru	Dhaumya,	I	wish	to	make	amends	for	the	conduct	of	my	dead	sons.	I	do
not	wish	their	souls	to	reside	in	the	netherworld	because	they	have	been	cursed
by	 Brahmins.	 I	 wish	 to	 give	 gifts	 to	 one	 lakh	 Brahmins	 and	 would	 like	 your
advice,	Guru.”
Dhaumya	could	not	believe	what	he	heard.	Why	was	the	King	behaving	in	such
an	uncharacteristic	fashion?	Was	this	the	same	man	who	had	insisted	that	all	the
dead	be	cremated	together,	irrespective	of	caste?	Since	he	was	offering	gifts,	it
would	 be	 prudent	 not	 to	 refuse.	 “The	 light	 of	 dharma	 has	 shone	 on	 you,	 my
King.	May	Sakra	and	the	other	Gods	in	heaven	bless	you.”
The	King	bent	to	touch	the	Brahmin’s	feet.	Then	he	summoned	Yudhishtra	and
announced	 his	 decision,	 saying	 it	 was	 required	 to	 ensure	 the	 peace	 of	 the
departed	 souls.	 Yudhishtra	 merely	 bowed	 and	 walked	 back	 to	 his	 chamber,
depression	clouding	his	mind.
When	Dhritarashtra	returned	to	his	own	chambers,	he	laughed	aloud	and	told
Gandhari,	“I	will	empty	the	treasury.	They	have	taken	me	for	a	fool	but	I	will
defeat	 Krishna	 and	 the	 others	 at	 their	 own	 game.	 Only	 my	 son	 will	 rule	 this
land!	 Your	 brother	 Shakuni	 was	 a	 genius,	 Gandhari.	 I	 sometimes	 hear	 him
speaking	to	me.”

“You	 will	 bring	 disaster	 again	 to	 the	 Kuru	 race,”	 Gandhari	 said	 grimly.	 Her
husband	laughed	mirthlessly	in	answer.
***
Soon,	 the	 treasury	 was	 empty	 as	 thousands	 of	 cows,	 horses	 and	 gold	 coins
were	 gifted	 to	 the	 Brahmins	 who	 came	 from	 far	 and	 wide	 to	 accept	 the
hospitality	 and	 generosity	 of	 the	 Kurus.	 When	 Yudhishtra	 spoke	 to	 the	 King
about	 the	 reports	 of	 starvation,	 deaths	 and	 rioting	 in	 the	 distant	 parts	 of	 the
country,	 Dhritarashtra	 called	 the	 astrologers	 and	 showed	 great	 concern	 when
they	predicted	grim	times	for	Bharatavarsha.	He	ordered	more	gifting	of	cows
and	wealth	to	the	Brahmins,	basking	in	their	praise	and	secretly	laughing	at	the
men	he	was	making	fools	of.	The	priests	and	astrologers	advised	a	Aswamedha
Yagna.	Sacrificing	a	horse	was	the	only	way	to	ensure	prosperity.	Dhritarashtra
called	 his	son,	the	merchant	 Yuyutsu,	and	asked	him	to	fund	the	yagna	 as	 his
patriotic	 duty.	 Yuyutsu	 replied	 that	 he	 was	 ever	 on	 the	 side	 of	 dharma	 and
advanced	a	huge	sum,	accepting	the	assets	of	the	country	as	collateral.
The	 horse	 ran	 through	 the	 war-ravaged	 vassal	 states	 of	 Bharatavarsha.	 The
imperial	army	followed,	crushing	those	who	refused	to	surrender,	and	taking
huge	 ransoms	 from	 the	 rest.	 Arjuna	 led	 the	 war	 of	 conquest,	 bringing	 death
and	 destruction	 once	 again	 to	 an	 already	 devastated	 country.	 Vrishaketu
accompanied	 his	 uncle	 in	 this	 journey	 of	 plunder.	 The	 King	 ensured	 that
whatever	was	brought	back	was	immediately	distributed	among	the	Brahmins,
so	that	the	treasury	remained	empty.	Hastinapura	fell	into	greater	and	greater
debt	to	his	son	Yuyutsu.
Vidhura	 left	 for	 the	 forest,	 disgusted.	 Kripa,	 the	 pragmatist,	 bided	 his	 time,
amused	at	the	turn	of	events.	His	sister,	Kripi,	Drona’s	sorrowing	wife,	died.	It
was	 left	 to	 him	 to	 perform	 the	 rituals,	 as	 his	 nephew	 Aswathama	 had	 long
vanished.	No	one	knew	where	the	accursed	Brahmin	had	gone.
Events	took	a	turn	for	the	worse	when	the	sacrificial	horse	entered	the	borders
of	 Sindh.	 Sushala	 had	 been	 grooming	 her	 son,	 Surutha,	 to	 take	 revenge	 for
Jayadratha’s	death.	Despite	the	best	efforts	of	the	many	Gurus	who	came	from
every	 corner	 of	 Bharata,	 Surutha	 had	 remained	 a	 weakling.	 The	 relentless
pressure	 from	 his	 mother	 turned	 him	 into	 a	 nervous	 boy	 who	 worried
perpetually	 about	 failure.	 When	 Arjuna’s	 imperial	 army	 entered	 Sindh,	 the

Pandava	wished	for	a	truce.	He	had	no	wish	to	plunder	his	cousin’s	land,	and
Arjuna	hoped	to	convince	Sushala	to	return	to	Hastinapura	with	him.
But	disaster	awaited	the	great	warrior.	As	the	Hastinapura	army	entered	the	city
gates,	Sushala	chided	the	cowering	boy	for	hiding	in	his	room	and	not	fighting
Arjuna	like	a	Kshatriya.	Surutha	reluctantly	left	his	chamber	and	mounted	his
horse.	 He	 made	 a	 dash	 towards	 the	 imperial	 army	 as	 Sushala	 watched	 with
pride	 from	 the	 palace.	 Arjuna	 blew	 his	 conch	 to	 welcome	 his	 nephew.	 The
horse	carrying	Surutha	panicked	and	the	boy	was	thrown	from	his	saddle.	He
broke	his	neck	as	soon	as	his	body	hit	the	ground,	dying	instantly.	Arjuna	had
unintentionally	 brought	 disaster	 to	 his	 cousin’s	 family	 again.	 The	 warrior
retreated	 with	 a	 heavy	 heart,	 more	 confused	 than	 ever	 about	 the	 Great	 War,
when	he	 had	killed	so	many	 of	 his	kin.	The	Gita	 made	 less	 and	 less	 sense	 to
him	as	life	unfolded.
Gandhari’s	 words	 came	 true.	 Dhritarashtra’s	 wily	 manoeuvring	 had	 brought
disaster	 to	 the	 Kuru	 clan.	 Finally,	 shattering	 his	 last	 dream	 of	 only	 his	 son
sitting	 on	 the	 throne	 of	 Hastinapura,	 a	 son	 was	 born	 to	 Uttara,	 Abhimanyu’s
young	 widow.	 Bitter	 and	 angry,	 he	 pined	 for	 Suyodhana,	 locked	 in	 his
chamber.	He	emerged	to	create	 more	havoc	by	 emptying	the	treasury,	giving
away	 more	 and	 more	 gifts	 and	 performing	 rituals	 with	 pomp.	 Uttara	 and
Abhimanyu’s	son,	Parikshat,	grew	up	not	knowing	what	the	future	held.
When	 Dhritarashtra	 finally	 decided	 to	 relinquish	 the	 throne,	 he	 ensured
Yudhishtra	would	not	succeed	him	by	naming	Parikshat	as	his	heir.	He	spoke	to
Yudhishtra	at	length	on	the	merits	of	going	to	the	Himalayas	in	search	of	inner
peace.	He	also	discussed	with	Dhaumya	the	virtues	of	taking	Kunti	with	them
when	 he	 and	 Gandhari	 left	 for	vanaprastha.	 Dhaumya	 was	 delighted.	 He	 was
getting	a	boy	of	barely	sixteen	as	King,	who	could	be	easily	manipulated.	He
could	then	impose	his	rules	without	check.	The	priest	listened	to	Dhritarashtra,
well	aware	of	the	King’s	inner	motivations,	and	said	unctuously	that	he	would
attempt	to	prevail	upon	Yudhishtra	to	undertake	a	pilgrimage	for	peace	and	on
Kunti	Devi	to	relinquish	court	life.
When	Dhaumya	left,	Dhritarashtra	sat	alone	for	a	long	time,	contemplating	the
final	blow	he	had	dealt	Pandu’s	sons.	The	revenge	he	was	taking	in	the	name	of
his	slain	sons	could	not	have	tasted	sweeter.	Not	all	battles	were	fought	on	the
battlefield	 with	 swords	 and	 maces.	 When	 Gandhari	 tried	 to	 talk	 to	 him	 that

night,	he	turned	away	and	feigned	sleep.
*****

79			VANAPRASTHA
	
KUNTI	 COULD	 NOT	 BELIEVE	 IT.	 After	 all	 the	 years	 of	 struggle,	 this	 was	 the	 last

thing	she	had	expected.	True,	the	scriptures	said	that	after	the	birth	of	a	greatgrandson,	 one	 should	 proceed	 to	 the	 forest	 for	 vanaprastha,	 yet	 she	 had
lingered.	Parikshat	was	just	sixteen.	Could	her	sons	not	wait	till	Abhimanyu’s
son	was	married?
“Rajamata,	 the	 decision	 is	 final.	 I	 will	 leave	 everything	 to	 Parikshat	 and	 take
asylum	 in	 the	 Himalayas.	 You,	 too,	 must	 leave	 with	 Uncle	 Dhritarashtra	 and
Aunt	Gandhari,”	Yudhishtra	stated	in	a	flat	tone.
Even	 if	 Dhaumya	 had	 said	 so,	 why	 did	 her	 son	 have	 to	 listen	 to	 such	 talk?
Yudhishtra	had	behaved	irrationally	ever	since	he	had	learnt	about	Karna.	He
kept	 saying	 they	 could	 have	 avoided	 the	 war,	 that	 she	 was	 responsible	 for	 it.
Would	it	really	have	solved	all	problems?	Would	Suyodhana	have	abdicated	in
favour	 of	 Karna?	 No,	 it	 was	 Draupadi	 who	 was	 responsible	 for	 the	 war,	 not
her.	Kunti	pulled	her	sari	pallu	over	her	head	and	turned	her	face	away.	She	did
not	want	her	sons	to	see	her	tears.	Without	a	word	of	blessing	or	farewell,	she
walked	out	of	the	palace,	pausing	just	for	a	second	in	the	vain	hope	that	one	of
her	sons	would	call	her	back.
“Kunti!”
The	dowager ’s	heart	skipped	a	beat	when	she	heard	the	familiar	voice.	Once	it
had	filled	her	with	hatred	and	anger,	but	there	was	nothing	left	to	like	or	dislike
any	more	in	life.	“Gandhari...”	Kunti	said,	turning	her	head.	She	hated	herself
for	 the	 tears	 that	 sprang	 to	 her	 eyes	 when	 she	 heard	 the	 proud	 Gandhari
sobbing.	Kunti	took	Gandhari’s	hands	in	her	own.
Dhritarashtra	stood	gazing	at	the	sky	with	unseeing	eyes.	He	was	content.	He,
whom	they	considered	blind	and	incompetent,	had	outlived	and	outwitted	them

all.	He	heard	the	two	women	crying	and	shook	his	head	contemptuously.	They
had	 fought	 so	 bitterly	 over	 so	 many	 years,	 and	 now	 stood	 together	 weeping
over	 their	 lost	 youth,	 their	 lost	 sons	 and	 grandsons,	 and	 for	 the	 life	 they	 had
forgotten	 to	 live	 in	 their	 pursuit	 for	 power.	 They	 were	 old	 and	 weary	 now;
burdens	to	the	family.	In	a	palace	where	hundreds	lived	comfortably,	they	were
three	people	too	many.
“If	 Suyodhana	 was	 alive,	 would	 this	 have	 happened?”	 Dhritarashtra	 asked
softly.
The	words	pierced	Kunti’s	heart	like	a	knife.	She	felt	angered	by	the	insensitive
comment	of	her	brother-in-law	but	she	knew	it	to	be	true.	Without	a	word	she
began	 walking,	 holding	 Gandhari’s	 arm.	 The	 sound	 of	 Dhritarashtra’s	 stick
tapping	the	ground	kept	rhythm	with	her	own	pace.	Kunti	walked	with	her	head
held	high.	She	could	hear	people	commenting	on	their	plight.	She	could	bear
that.	 But	 the	 odd	 words	 of	 sympathy	 from	 the	 very	 people	 she	 had	 always
ignored,	 pierced	 her	 heart.	 She	 did	 not	 raise	 her	 eyes	 to	 look	 at	 the	 shabby
figures	that	lined	the	road.	They	had	come	to	bid	farewell	to	the	royals	or	to
gawk,	 each	 as	 their	 nature	 dictated.	 The	 war	 had	 long	 been	 over,	 but	 the
ravages	were	still	apparent	to	all.
“Maharaja	Dhritarashtra!”
“Vidhura,	my	brother...”	Dhritarashtra	’s	voice	was	a	shadow	of	itself.
Kunti	 watched	 Vidhura	 touch	 his	 brother	 and	 sister-in-law’s	 feet	 respectfully.
When	he	came	to	her,	she	turned	away	saying,	“Why	have	you	come,	Vidhura?
We	are	beggars	now.	We	have	nothing	to	give	and	no	place	to	go.”
“Devi,	have	you	forgotten	that	you	have	my	hut	in	the	forest?”
“We	will	be	a	burden	to	you,	Vidhura.	I	am	both	old	and	blind,”	Dhritarashtra
sighed.
“Your	Highness,	it	will	be	an	honour.	Of	course,	it	does	not	have	the	luxuries
of	the	palace,	for	it	is	a	Shudra	home.”
“Brother,	I	see	your	words	have	not	lost	their	barb.”

“We	cannot	change	the	truth,	Your	Highness.	I	may	be	your	brother-in-law,	but
I	 am	 still	 a	 Shudra.	 If	 a	 Shudra’s	 hut	 is	 not	 beneath	 your	 dignity,	 I	 would	 be
honoured	to	have	you	all	come	and	live	with	me.”
“There	is	nothing	beneath	us,	Vidhura,”	Kunti	replied	wearily.	“We	are	walking
on	 the	 street	 as	 you	 can	 see.”	 And	 this	 was	 her	 reward	 for	 a	 lifetime	 spent
fighting	shadow	wars,	time	wasted	on	intrigue	and	strategy,	just	so	that	her	son
could	ascend	the	throne	of	Hastinapura.
“The	war	of	 dharma	has	made	most	of	us	beggars.	Please	come	and	light	up
my	lonely	life.”
Kunti	 did	 not	 resist	 when	 Vidhura	 led	 the	 way.	 Together,	 they	 walked	 to	 his
forest	home	–	the	hut	he	had	taken	almost	a	lifetime	to	build.	The	rest	of	their
lives	 to	 be	 spent	 in	 the	 contemplation	 of	 truth,	 immersed	 in	 spiritual	 matters.
That	was	what	they	thought.
But	 the	 wheel	 of	 Kunti’s	karma	 kept	 turning.	 Takshaka	 and	 his	 revolutionary
army	returned	to	set	the	forest	ablaze.	The	fire	consumed	them	all.	There	was
no	escaping	the	bitter	fruits	of	karma.
*****

80			LONG	LIVE	THE
							REVOLUTION
	
“LONG	 LIVE	 THE	 REVOLUTION!”	 Takshaka	yelled.	He	and	a	few	followers	had	set

fire	 to	 Vidhura’s	 hut	 early	 that	 morning.	 They	 had	 watched	 Kunti,
Dhritarashtra,	 Gandhari	 and	 Vidhura	 die	 in	 agony.	 The	 four	 old	 people	 sat
huddled	together	crying	for	mercy	as	the	fire	engulfed	them.
Yuyutsu	 had	 driven	 thousands	 of	 Nagas	 and	 other	 low-castes	 out	 of	 their
miserable	farms	and	slums.	These	disenfranchised	people	had	nothing	more	to
lose	 and	 they	 swelled	 the	 ranks	 of	 Takshaka’s	 army.	 Then	 why	 were	 they	 so
silent	when	their	Great	Leader	announced	such	a	victory?
“This	is	a	great	day	for	the	revolution!”	Takshaka	shouted	again.	The	people
stared	silently	at	the	ageing	Naga	leader.	“Long	live	the	revolution!”	he	cried
in	 a	 hoarse	 voice,	 punching	 the	 air.	 “This	 is	 just	 the	 beginning...”	 Takshaka
scowled	 at	 the	 people	 who	 had	 started	 drifting	 away.	 “We	 will	 seize	 power
from	 our	 enemies;	 we	 will	 lynch	 men	 like	 Yuyutsu.”	 No	 one	 was	 listening.
“Long	 live	 the	 revolution!”	 Takshaka	 screamed	 again.	 Silence	 was	 the	 only
response.	 The	 people	 had	 turned	 away	 from	 him	 as	 from	 a	 leper.	 ‘An	 entire
lifetime	 spent	 uplifting	 these	 thankless	 people	 and	 this	 is	 how	 they	 treat	 me,’
thought	Takshaka	bitterly	as	he	trudged	out	of	the	village.
Finally	he	arrived	at	the	place	where	Vidhura’s	hut	had	stood.	Rain	had	washed
away	much	of	the	debris,	leaving	only	a	few	charred	bones	in	the	rubble.	He
had	 to	 do	 something	 grand	 to	 change	 the	 history	 of	 Bharatavarsha,	 thought
Takshaka.	When	he	had	found	Vasuki	lying	dead	at	the	feet	of	the	idol	of	Shiva
in	the	forest	years	before,	he	had	thought	the	last	challenge	to	his	leadership	of
the	Nagas	had	ended.	There	was	some	poetic	justice	in	Vasuki	being	killed	by
cobra	bite.	However,	until	now,	the	revolution	he	had	dreamed	of	had	not	taken
place.	 He	 had	 thought	 that	 killing	 Dhritarashtra,	 the	 old	 King	 of	 Hastinapura,
would	 trigger	 events	 but	 not	 even	 his	 own	 people	 considered	 it	 worth

mentioning.	 He	 was	 desperate	 for	 something	 big	 to	 happen.	 He	 was	 getting
older	and	time	was	running	out.
An	 idea	 started	 forming	 in	 Takshaka’s	 mind.	 Parikshat!	 He	 had	 heard	 the
Pandavas	 would	 soon	 be	 leaving	 for	 the	 Himalayas	 and	 the	 boy	 would	 be
crowned	as	the	new	King.	A	smile	spread	across	his	face	as	he	thought	about
Parikshat.	He	would	not	need	an	army	of	idiots	with	him	to	do	what	he	planned.
He	 could	 do	 it	 alone.	 He	 would	 kill	 Parikshat	 and	 start	 the	 ball	 of	 revolution
rolling	again.
***
A	 messenger	 dashed	 through	 the	 dry	 bed	 of	 the	 river	 Sarswati	 to	 reach
Hastinapura.	 He	 carried	 terrifying	 news.	 In	 Dwaraka,	 a	 civil	 war	 had	 broken
out	 between	 the	 followers	 of	 Kritavarma	 and	 those	 of	 Krishna’s	 son,	 Samba.
The	entire	city	was	aflame.	Hearing	the	news,	the	Pandavas	rushed	to	save	the
city	 of	 their	 dear	 friend,	 who	 had	 helped	 them	 win	 the	 great	 war.	 They	 were
shocked	 to	 find	 Krishna’s	 wives,	 protected	 only	 by	 a	 handful	 of	 guards,
walking	through	the	desert	in	a	forlorn	procession.	Krishna	was	nowhere	to	be
seen.	An	old	Yadava	soldier	gave	Arjuna	the	message	that	the	Lord	had	left	the
safety	of	his	wives	and	servants	in	his	hands.	Yudhishtra,	Nakula	and	Sahadeva
rushed	towards	Dwaraka	while	Arjuna	started	his	journey	back	to	Hastinapura
with	the	wives	of	his	beloved	friend.	His	heart	was	heavy	with	dread.
On	 the	 way,	 they	 were	 attacked	 by	 the	 Durjayas	 and	 Nagas.	 Arjuna	 found	 he
was	no	match	for	the	combined	attack.	Durjaya	jumped	into	Arjuna’s	chariot,
grabbed	 the	Gandiva	 and	 hit	 Arjuna	 on	 the	 head	 with	 the	 great	 bow.	 It	 broke
into	two	and	Arjuna	lost	consciousness.	When	he	awoke,	he	was	all	alone	in	the
desert.	 His	 chariot,	 his	 horses	 and	 all	 the	 valuable	 ornaments	 he	 had	 been
wearing	had	vanished.	More	shockingly,	Krishna’s	wives	were	nowhere	to	be
seen.	He,	the	famed	warrior,	the	greatest	archer	in	the	world,	the	man	who	had
vanquished	Karna,	Drona,	Bhishma	and	countless	others	in	the	war,	had	lost	to
a	minor	dacoit	and	failed	to	save	his	friend’s	wives.
Arjuna	began	walking	towards	Dwaraka,	not	knowing	how	to	break	the	news
to	Krishna	and	his	brothers.	On	the	outskirts	of	Prabhasa,	he	met	Sage	Vyasa.
Arjuna	fell	at	the	seer ’s	feet,	sobbing,	“Swami,	a	dacoit	defeated	me	and	took
away	Krishna’s	wives.	If	he	is	an	avatar,	why	could	he	not	save	his	wives?	Why

was	I	unable	to	defeat	Durjaya?	I	have	done	my	duty	and	lived	according	to	the
scriptures.	My	mind	no	longer	knows	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.”
The	 sage	 lifted	 Arjuna	 up	 and	 said,	 “Arjuna,	 time	 is	 God,	 time	 is	 dharma.
Fame,	 victory,	 wealth,	 infamy,	 defeat,	 poverty	 –	 all	 are	 but	 manifestations	 of
time.	 Kalapurusha	acts	with	prakruti,	nature,	 to	 set	 the	 rhythm	 of	 life.	 Just	 as
seasons	 come	 and	 go,	 like	 winter	 follows	 the	 rainy	 season,	 which	 follows
summer,	 which	 follows	 spring,	 time	 brings	 different	 stages.	 Your	 time	 as	 a
warrior	has	ended.	Your	karma	will	catch	up	with	you.	Krishna’s	time	will	end
soon;	even	he	is	not	free	of	his	karma.	Prakruti	and	Kalapurusha,	the	God	of
Time,	together	bring	change.”
Arjuna	bowed.	Though	the	sage	had	not	answered	his	questions	directly,	he	felt
less	troubled	as	he	walked	on	towards	Dwaraka.
*****

81			FRUITS	OF	KARMA
	
WHAT	 WAS	 WRONG?	 WHY	 WERE	 THE	 BIRDS	 SO	 SILENT? 	It	had	been	raining	without

pause	 but	 even	 the	 downpour	 did	 little	 to	 quench	 the	 fires	 raging	 through
Dwaraka.	Balarama	was	a	shattered	man.	Where	had	the	glorious	future	he	had
envisaged	 for	 his	 country	 vanished?	 Someone	 screamed	 from	 the	 street,	 a
blood-chilling	 cry.	 His	 people	 were	 hacking	 each	 other	 to	 death	 and	 he	 was
powerless	 to	 do	 anything.	 Samba	 and	 his	 gang	 of	 ruffians	 were	 busy	 looting
the	 city	 and	 killing	 people.	 Even	 Krishna’s	 wives	 had	 not	 been	 safe	 from	 the
violence	of	his	crazed	son.
It	 had	 all	 started	 with	 a	 drunken	 brawl,	 which	 had	 become	 a	 daily	 feature	 of
late.	 Balarama	 had	 tried	 banning	 liquor	 from	 his	 kingdom	 but	 somehow	 it
found	its	way	back	into	the	city.	When	Prince	Samba	himself	was	an	alcoholic,
prohibition	 had	 little	 meaning.	 Drunk	 or	 otherwise,	 Samba	 had	 no	 business
insulting	visiting	savants.	The	venerable	Kritavarma	had	tried	to	keep	his	men
under	control	but	it	had	been	hard	for	soldiers	to	watch	in	silence	while	Samba
slapped	 their	 respected	 Commander.	 When	 Kritavarma	 tried	 to	 pacify	 his
agitated	 soldiers,	 Samba	 stabbed	 him	 in	 the	 back.	 Dwaraka	 was	 in	 flames
before	 the	 embers	 of	 Kritavarma’s	 pyre	 had	 died	 down.	 A	 full-fledged	 civil
war	raged	between	Samba’s	thugs	and	Kritavarma’s	loyal	soldiers.
Balarama	walked	through	the	burning	streets	trying	to	talk	sense	into	those	he
met.	The	rioters	hid	their	missiles	while	he	passed,	but	their	eyes	and	ears	were
shut	to	his	prayers	and	pleading.	They	resumed	hacking	each	other	to	death	the
moment	he	turned	the	corner.	Balarama	lost	all	hope.
The	 sea	 had	 receded	 as	 far	 as	 the	 eye	 could	 see.	 Balarama	 stared	 at	 the	 vast
expanse	 of	 sand.	 It	 did	 not	 look	 like	 the	 usual	 ebbing	 tide.	 He	 turned	 back	 to
look	at	the	palace.	It	was	in	flames	and	smoke	rose	like	a	black	python,	curling
to	the	skies.	His	mind	felt	numb.	Krishna	had	gone	to	the	desert,	taking	all	the
women	in	the	palace.	Despite	Krishna’s	pleading,	Balarama’s	wife	Revathi,	his

daughter	 Valsala,	 and	 his	 daughter-in-law,	 Lakshmana,	 had	 refused	 to	 leave
him.	They	would	be	in	the	palace,	waiting	for	him	to	come	back.	Oh	God,	keep
them	safe,	Balarama	prayed	as	he	walked	along	the	forlorn	beach.
Where	had	the	sea	gone?	There	was	no	water	as	far	as	the	eye	could	see.	Fish
lay	flapping	on	the	sand	and	in	the	shallow	pools	left	by	the	receding	waters.
Turtles	 and	 monster	 crabs	 were	 leaving	 the	 safety	 of	 the	 water	 and	 crawling
back	to	shore.
Balarama	collapsed	on	the	beach.	Perhaps	he	could	finally	shut	out	the	stench
of	burning	flesh	coming	from	his	city	and	smell	the	salty	air	of	the	sea	instead.
‘Krishna,	 where	 have	 you	 run	 off	 to	 with	 your	 countless	 wives	 when	 your
people	 need	 you	 the	 most?	 Gandhari’s	 curse	 is	 coming	 to	 haunt	 us,	 brother.
The	 fruits	 of	 your	karma	 will	 not	 pass	 us	 by.	 You	 could	 have	 saved	 us	 with
your	 divine	 powers.	 I	 am	 just	 an	 ordinary	 man,	 but	 I	 cannot	 leave	 those	 who
trust	me	in	their	time	of	despair.	Where	have	you	run	to,	brother?’
Balarama	pulled	himself	to	his	knees	and	stared	at	the	bleak	sky.	What	was	that
sound?	 There	 was	 an	 almost	 inaudible	 hum.	 He	 stood	 up	 to	 see.	 The	 vast
expanse	 of	 nothingness	 in	 front	 of	 him	 was	 frightening.	 He	 looked	 at	 his
wrinkled	 hands	 and	 the	 salt	 crystals	 sticking	 to	 his	 palms.	 He	 felt	 as
insignificant	as	a	tiny	particle	of	sand.	Then	he	saw	it.	The	sea	had	receded	to
grow	 into	 a	 monster	 in	 the	 sky.	 A	 wave	 that	 almost	 touched	 the	 clouds	 stood
still	in	the	far	horizon	to	the	west.
Balarama	knew	in	a	flash	what	was	coming	towards	him	and	his	city.	He	bent	to
pick	up	a	fistful	of	sand	and	then	stood	up,	his	spine	erect,	his	expression	calm.
The	breeze	had	picked	up	and	his	dhoti	flapped	against	his	thighs.	He	raised	the
fistful	of	sand	saying,	“I	promise	to	return	whenever	my	compatriots	forget	the
lessons	 of	 ahimsa.	 Not	 as	 a	 prophet	 or	 avatar,	 but	 as	 a	 man,	 with	 all	 the
glorious	 failings	 of	 human	 nature.”	 The	 wind	 howled	 back,	 mocking	 him.
“Laugh	now,	but	I	will	be	born	here,	in	your	lap,	again	and	again,	until	the	last
of	my	countrymen	learn	the	lessons	of	peace.	I	will	come	back	whenever	my
people	 forget	 the	 lessons	 of	 love.	 Give	 me	 no	moksha;	 this	 is	 my	 mukti,	 my
enlightenment.”
The	massive	wave	had	grown	even	higher	and	was	rushing	towards	Dwaraka
like	a	fearsome	beast.	The	wind	paused,	as	though	to	listen	to	Balarama’s	last

words.	“I	am	Ananta.	I	am	Infinite.	I	am	Immortal.	I	will	return	when	my	people
need	 me	 most.”	 Balarama	 hurled	 the	 fistful	 of	 sand	 into	 the	 gigantic	 wall	 of
water	a	fraction	of	a	nimisha	before	it	hit	him.
Like	 a	 giant	 fist,	 the	 wave	 flattened	 Dwaraka	 and	 rushed	 inland,	 burying	 the
great	 city	 of	 Balarama	 under	 a	 mountain	 of	 water.	 Not	 a	 single	 Yadava	 was
spared.	It	was	not	the	end,	but	the	beginning.
*****

82			THE	HUNTER
	
JARA	COULD	NOT	BELIEVE	HIS	EYES.	There	he	was,	his	Lord,	his	beloved.	He	had

spent	 years	 trying	 to	 catch	 a	 glimpse	 of	 him	 and	 now	 Krishna	 sat	 all	 alone
under	the	banyan	tree.	Could	he	risk	moving	closer	to	his	Lord?	There	was	no
sign	of	the	smile	that	made	him	look	so	divine.	It	was	the	face	of	a	man	weary
of	life.
“Prabhu!”	Jara	called	and	prostrated	himself	on	the	ground.
Krishna	opened	his	eyes.	“Jara...come...”	he	said	in	a	tired	voice.
“Prabhu,	 I	 am	 an	 untouchable.”	 Jara’s	 joy	 knew	 no	 bounds.	 His	 Lord	 was
speaking	to	him;	he	knew	his	name.
“Come	to	me,”	Krishna	said	again.
Jara	did	not	think	twice.	Pushing	back	the	fear	that	someone	might	see	him,	he
rushed	to	his	Lord.
“Can	you	do	me	a	small	favour?”	Krishna	asked	with	his	eyes	closed.
Jara	smelt	the	perfume	of	the	wilted	garland	around	Krishna’s	neck.	His	heart
almost	stopped	beating	in	his	chest.	“Command	me	Prabhu!”	Jara	said	eagerly.
He	waited	for	a	wave	of	joy	to	wash	over	him	but	he	felt	nothing.
“There	is	a	bow	and	quiver	behind	this	tree.	Can	you	get	it?”	Krishna’s	voice
was	a	whisper.
Jara	walked	around	the	tree	to	fetch	them.	As	his	hand	touched	the	weapons,	the
suspicion	that	Krishna	would	ask	him	to	do	something	he	could	not	do	began
to	gnaw	at	his	mind.	He	placed	the	bow	and	arrows	at	Krishna’s	feet	and	stole	a
touch	of	the	divine	feet	before	standing	back	at	a	respectable	distance.	His	dog

sat	down	near	him.
Krishna	tested	the	sharpness	of	the	arrow	and	smiled	at	Jara,	who	bowed	again
with	hands	folded.	“Jara,	take	this	bow	and	arrow.”
Jara	faltered	but	took	the	weapons	as	if	they	were	floral	offerings.	“Now	move
back	a	few	feet	or	else	you	will	not	be	able	to	aim.”
“Prabhu,	what	do	you	want	me	to	do?”
“Shoot	me,	Jara.	Kill	me!”
Jara	threw	himself	at	Krishna’s	feet	and	began	wailing.	“You	are	my	God!	You
are	the	God	of	the	Universe.	How	can	I	commit	such	a	sin?”
“Jara,	 it	is	your	innocence	of	heart	and	faith	that	sees	God	in	 me.	I	thought	I
was	helping	society	but	I	fear	I	was	being	used.	I	have	unleashed	powers	over
which	I	have	no	control.”
“Prabhu,	you	are	never	wrong.	Whatever	you	have	done,	is	right.”
“I	fear	my	people	will	fall	prey	to	the	wolves	who	are	bound	to	use	my	name.
To	what	horrible	fate	am	I	leaving	my	people?”
“Whatever	you	did	was	maya,	your	divine	play.	We	are	your	children	and	we
should	be	amused	by	your	pranks,”	Jara	said	between	sobs.
“Gandhari	 cursed	 me,	 saying	 I	 would	 die	 uncared	 for,	 and	 my	 people	 would
perish	fighting	each	other.	She	predicted	that	our	deaths	would	be	quite	unlike
those	 of	 her	 warrior	 sons.	 See	 how	 her	 curse	 is	 coming	 true.	 I	 saved	 my
unworthy	son	 from	 a	Nishada	 and	that	son	 has	 ensured	 the	destruction	 of	the
entire	 Yadava	 clan.	 The	 long	 arm	 of	 my	 karma	 is	 catching	 up	 with	 me.
Dwaraka	is	gone.	I	came	to	save	the	world	but	I	could	not	even	save	my	own
people.	I	hope	Arjuna	will	protect	my	wives	after	I	am	gone.”
“Prabhu,	don’t	tell	me	these	things.	Do	not	try	to	shake	my	faith.	You	are	our
only	hope.	Don’t	take	that	away	from	us.”
“Shoot	me,	Jara!	No	one	deserves	to	kill	me	more	than	you.”

“I	cannot,	Prabhu.	I	have	never	killed	even	an	ant.	How	can	I	kill	the	person	I
love	the	most?”
“You	must.”	Krishna	looked	at	Jara	with	a	calm	gaze	that	brought	the	beggar	to
his	knees	in	obeisance.
With	 trembling	 hands,	 Jara	 took	 the	 bow.	 The	 blind	 dog	 growled.	 Jara	 hated
himself	for	doing	it	but	he	could	not	refuse	his	Lord.	There	was	something	so
pitiful	in	Krishna’s	voice	that	it	sliced	through	Jara’s	heart.	For	his	Prabhu,	he
would	even	commit	the	sin	of	killing.	Without	looking	at	Krishna,	Jara	let	fly
the	 arrow,	 just	 as	 Ekalavya	 had	 taught	 him	 to	 do	 so	 long	 ago.	 He	 heard
Krishna’s	 cry	 of	 pain	 and	 closed	 his	 eyes	 in	 anguish.	 The	 bow	 fell	 from	 his
hands	and	he	collapsed	to	the	ground.
“Jara...”	 Krishna’s	 voice	 was	 calling	 him!	 He	 was	 not	 dead!	 Jara	 opened	 his
eyes.	To	his	horror,	he	saw	that	the	arrow	had	pierced	Krishna’s	foot	instead	of
his	heart.	He	rushed	to	take	it	out	but	Krishna	stopped	him.	“Let	it	be,	Jara.	My
time	has	come.”
“Prabhu,	I	am	a	sinner.	I	have	killed	you.”
“No,	you	have	not.	In	another	life	I	hid	behind	a	tree	and	shot	you	when	you
were	fighting	your	brother.	This	is	the	fruit	of	my	action.”
“I	don’t	understand,	Prabhu.”
“In	another	life,	which	you	do	not	remember	but	I	do,	you	were	the	Great	King
Bali,	of	the	Vanara	race,	and	I,	Rama.	My	death	at	your	hands	was	predestined.”
“People	 call	 me	 mongoose,	 not	 monkey,	 Prabhu.	 You	 are	 telling	 me	 things
beyond	my	understanding.”
“You	 are	 blessed,	 Jara,	 for	 it	 is	 the	 size	 of	 your	 heart	 that	 counts,	 not	 your
brain.”
“Prabhu,	don’t	leave	me.	Take	me	with	you	to	your	abode,	to	Vaikunta,”	Jara
begged,	taking	another	arrow	from	the	quiver,	ready	to	plunge	it	into	his	own
heart.

“No!”	The	Lord	stared	into	the	eyes	of	his	devotee.
“I	 know	 I	 deserve	 hell.	 I	 cannot	 go	 to	 Vaikunta.	 However,	 I	 will	 die.	 I	 cannot
live	with	the	guilt	of	having	killed	you.”
“Jara,	 Vaikunta	 does	 not	 deserve	 you.	 Stay	 here	 and	 spread	 the	 message	 of
love.	 Do	 not	 sing	 about	 my	 deeds	 on	 earth	 but	 about	 the	 Krishna	 you	 see	 in
your	clean	heart.	Sing	about	my	idyllic	childhood	and	the	innocent	women	who
loved	me.	Sing	about	those	beautiful	days	and	magical	nights	where	the	only
language	 was	 love.	 Sing	 about	 me	 as	 the	 ideal	 son	 every	 mother	 desires,	 the
ideal	lover	every	woman	dreams	of.”
“You	are	all	that	and	more,	Prabhu.	I	have	heard	Brahmins	talking	about	your
wonderful	Gita...”
“Jara,	what	your	heart	sings	is	more	important	than	any	divine	song.	Let	them
debate	 about	 what	 I	 said	 and	 what	 I	 meant.	 Kali	 is	 rising.	 The	 Dark	 Age	 is
dawning,	 when	 a	 few	 will	 rule	 over	 many	 and	 the	 wicked	 will	 win	 over	 the
righteous.	 I	 should	 have	 aimed	 my	 chakra	 at	 Dhaumya’s	 throat,	 but	 alas,	 I
pointed	at	Suyodhana’s	thigh	for	Bhima	to	break,	and	to	Bhishma’s	throat	for
Arjuna	 to	 shoot	 at.	 Perhaps	 the	 next	 time	 I	 come,	 I	 will	 preach	 the	 peace	 and
tranquility	of	dharma,	and	the	refuge	of	sanga,	where	everyone	will	be	equal
and	 journey	 together	 towards	 enlightenment.	 If	 that	 does	 not	 work,	 I	 will
destroy	the	whole	world	as	Kalki	and	start	over.”
“It	is	all	maya,	Prabhu.”
“Jara,	 what	 is	 done	 cannot	 be	 undone.	 Be	 the	 Krishna	 I	 wanted	 to	 be.	 In	 my
death,	allow	me	to	be	resurrected	as	the	Krishna	of	love	and	compassion.	Be
here	 as	the	light	 of	 hope	in	this	miserable	world	ruled	by	 darkness.	 Dwell	in
those	eyes	that	look	upon	misery	with	compassion.”
“Prabhu,	do	not	leave	me	alone.”
“Jara,	a	new	Krishna	will	appear	–	one	who	melts	in	the	love	of	your	heart	and
who	will	always	live	in	the	minds	of	people	like	you.”
Jara	put	Krishna’s	head	on	his	lap	and	tried	to	sing,	but	sobs	choked	his	voice.
Krishna	handed	his	flute	to	the	beggar.	Peace	descended	on	him	and	the	smile

Jara	 loved	 so	 much	 returned	 to	 his	 handsome	 face.	 Jara	 watched	 through	 his
tears	as	life	ebbed	away	from	Krishna’s	mortal	body.	Soon	night	cast	her	dark
mantle	over	the	Lord	and	his	disciple.	Jara	sat	with	Krishna’s	head	on	his	lap
until	 the	 eastern	 horizon	 began	 to	 turn	 saffron.	 When	 he	 saw	 some	 priests
coming	his	way,	he	kissed	his	Lord	on	the	forehead	and	ran	away.
Deep	in	the	forest,	Jara	took	out	Krishna’s	flute.	The	birds	stopped	chirping	to
listen,	as	once	again	Krishna’s	enchanting	music	spread	like	a	gentle	mist	over
the	world.
*****

83			HEAVEN	CALLS
	
THE	 PANDAVAS	 STOOD	 WATCHING	the	giant	waves	pummel	the	once	glorious	city

of	Dwaraka.	Only	the	tall	towers	of	Balarama’s	palace	remained	visible.	Soon
they	too	would	be	swallowed	by	the	raging	sea.
Yudhishtra	 turned	 away,	 closing	 his	 eyes.	 ‘I	 cannot	 watch	 this.	 Why	 should	 it
end	in	this	way?	We	have	always	been	told	that	good	wins	over	evil	and	that	the
righteous	 are	 blessed	 with	 bliss.	 Why	 then	 is	 reality	 so	 different?	 We	 fought
Suyodhana	 and	 killed	 thousands,	 thinking	 it	 to	 be	 our	dharma.	 Now,	 nothing
remains.	I	have	felt	no	peace	since	the	war	and	now	to	think	of	Krishna’s	city
being	destroyed	like	this!	Why	has	good	not	triumphed	over	evil?	Or	were	we
evil	and	this	is	Suyodhana’s	revenge?	Is	Aunt	Gandhari’s	curse	coming	true?	I
have	always	followed	dharma.	If	what	the	seers	say	is	true	and	dharma	alone
wins,	then	I	have	lost.	Was	I	then	the	man	of	adharma,	and	Suyodhana	the	man
of	dharma?	Or	is	life	beyond	the	rules	laid	down	by	man?	Did	my	story	end
with	Suyodhana’s	death	and	my	victory	in	the	war?	How	nice	and	appropriate	it
would	 have	 been	 to	 say	 that	 dharma	 had	 won	 and	 Krishna	 had	 led	 us	 to	 a
victory	 of	 dharma	 over	 adharma.	 Then	 the	 bloody	 battleground	 of
Kurukshetra	would	have	been	truly	dharmakshetra.	Now	it	is	just	a	place	where
lakhs	 of	 people	 were	 slain.	 My	 life	 has	 been	 wasted	 in	 pursuit	 of	 pleasing
others.	I	wish	I	had	lived	like	Suyodhana,	listening	to	my	heart.’
Yudhishtra	felt	his	head	throbbing.	Questions,	doubts,	the	evils	of	reason	 and
logical	thought,	were	driving	him	insane.	Why	could	Krishna	not	have	stopped
the	civil	war	between	his	own	people?	If	the	giant	wave	had	not	wiped	out	the
port	city	of	Dwaraka,	the	civil	war	between	the	Yadavas	would	have	done	it.	Or
was	 it	 all	 a	 part	 of	 a	 greater	 plan?	 No,	 it	 had	 ended	 as	 it	 was	 meant	 to	 be.
Krishna,	in	his	divinity,	knew	everything.	It	was	easier	to	believe	that.	The	most
terrible	thing	was	the	fate	of	Krishna’s	wives.	Fate?	How	else	could	he	explain
Arjuna’s	failure	to	hold	out	against	a	robber	like	Durjaya?	In	the	terrible	battle
in	the	desert,	Durjaya	had	defeated	Arjuna	and	taken	away	Krishna’s	wives.	The

avatar,	who	came	to	save	the	world,	could	save	neither	his	city	nor	his	wives.
There	 was	 no	 explanation	 for	 these	 things	 other	 than	 to	 believe	 it	 was	 all
Krishna’s	maya.
Yudhishtra	was	tired	of	questions	and	even	more	tired	of	seeking	the	answers.
The	 time	 had	 come	 to	 take	 a	 journey,	 the	 last	 one.	 He	 was	 going	 to	 the
Himalayas	 to	 contemplate	 on	 life.	 It	 would	 not	 be	 easy	 but	 it	 would	 perhaps
soothe	 his	 burning	 conscience.	 He	 was	 tired	 of	 ruling.	 Let	 Dhaumya	 and
Yuyutsu	 take	 care	 of	 it.	 He	 was	 leaving	 everything	 to	 Arjuna’s	 grandson,
Parikshat.	The	boy	was	still	too	young	to	be	King,	but	his	kingship	would	just
be	 titular.	 The	 real	 King	 would	 be	 Yuyutsu.	 Parikshat	 had	 been	 compelled	 to
marry,	despite	his	young	age,	to	ensure	the	next	generation.
***
Once	 they	 reached	 Hastinapura,	 Yudhishtra	 made	 arrangements	 to
ceremoniously	anoint	Parikshat.	On	the	day	after	the	coronation,	even	before
the	flowers	that	decorated	the	streets	had	wilted,	Yudhishtra,	his	four	brothers,
and	Draupadi,	walked	out	of	the	palace,	leaving	the	throne	for	which	they	had
killed	 so	 many	 people.	 Seeing	 his	 brothers	 and	 wife	 dressed	 in	 their	 simple
clothes,	Yudhishtra	wished	yet	again	that	he	was	going	alone	on	this	journey.
But	 he	 had	 not	 the	 will	 to	 argue	 with	 them.	 Yudhishtra	 sighed	 and	 began
walking,	 leaving	 the	 palace	 of	 Hastinapura	 behind.	 There	 were	 hundreds	 of
people	 on	 the	 streets	 to	 watch	 their	 departure.	 No	 one	 cheered,	 no	 one	 cried.
They	 knew	 nothing	 would	 really	 change	 for	 them.	 Dhaumya,	 the	 Guru,
mumbled	some	mantras	in	blessing,	and	the	final	parting	was	made.
Yudhishtra	walked	quickly,	in	order	to	get	away.	He	could	hear	the	footsteps	of
his	brothers	and	Draupadi	hurrying	behind	him.
As	he	left	Hastinapura,	he	paused	for	one	last	look	at	the	city	he	had	fought	so
hard	to	prise	away	from	his	cousin,	using	every	means,	fair	and	foul.	He	could
almost	 hear	 Shakuni’s	 laughter	 and	 the	 dice	 rolling	 on	 the	 floor.	 No,	 it	 had
been	destiny,	fate,	karma,	he	told	himself.	Everything	that	happened	was	for	the
good,	 Krishna	 had	 often	 said.	 Another	 question	 arose	 in	 Yudhishtra’s	 mind.
Everything	was	for	the	good,	but	for	whose	good?	The	question	terrified	him.
It	was	time	to	go	to	the	Himalayas,	away	from	the	real	world	of	illusion.

A	beggar	was	sleeping	on	a	dirty	pavement	strewn	with	garbage.	He	looked	as
content	as	a	baby.	Yudhishtra	paused.	He	knew	the	beggar.	What	was	his	name?
Ah,	 Jara.	 His	 gaze	 stopped	 on	 the	 flute	 the	 beggar	 had	 tucked	 into	 his
waistband.	Krishna’s	flute!	Where	had	he	got	it?	Jara’s	body	shivered	as	a	cold
breeze	nudged	him.	On	impulse,	Yudhishtra	took	off	the	shawl	he	was	wearing
and	covered	Jara.	He	paused.	He	did	not	want	the	beggar	to	owe	him	anything;
he	 would	 take	 something	 from	 him	 for	 the	 shawl	 he	 had	 covered	 him	 with.
Yudhishtra	 picked	 up	 Jara’s	 tattered	 blanket.	 It	 stank	 of	 poverty.	 Yudhishtra
smiled.	His	penance	was	assuming	more	meaning.
As	 Yudhishtra	 moved	 on,	 Jara’s	 dog	 stirred.	 It	 was	 old,	 blind	 and	 close	 to
death.	Many	people	had	kicked	and	tortured	it,	yet	somehow	it	had	managed	to
stay	 alive	 on	 the	 streets	 of	 Bharatavarsha,	 thanks	 to	 the	 kindness	 of	 a	 few.
Dharma	 sniffed	 the	 air	 and	 caught	 the	 fast-vanishing	 smell	 of	 his	 master ’s
blanket.	The	blind	dog	began	following	Yudhishtra	on	its	tottering	legs.
***
In	 the	 upper	 reaches	 of	 the	 Himalayas,	 Draupadi	 was	 the	 first	 to	 fall	 from
exhaustion.	Her	cries	for	help	were	like	shards	of	glass	in	Yudhishtra’s	heart
and	 he	 almost	 lost	 his	 will.	 But	 he	 braced	 himself.	 It	 was	 a	 test	 of	 the	 selfcontrol	 and	 detachment	 he	 had	 cultivated.	 He	 knew	 she	 had	 always	 loved
Arjuna	the	most.	But	she	did	not	call	out	the	name	of	any	of	her	five	husbands.
As	her	lips	turned	blue	and	death	came	to	claim	her,	she	spoke	Karna’s	name.
Closing	his	eyes,	Yudhishtra	turned	away.	Bhima	lingered,	trying	to	talk	to	the
now-silent	Draupadi.	His	brothers	were	far	ahead.	He	called	to	Yudhishtra,	but
the	eldest	Pandava	did	not	stop.	Bhima	felt	his	heart	would	break	if	he	stayed	to
watch	 his	 beloved	 Draupadi	 die.	 Suddenly,	 Hidumbi’s	 face	 flashed	 into	 his
mind,	 the	 Rakshasi	 he	 had	 not	 seen	 since	 he	 had	 left	 her,	 who	 had	 starved	 to
death,	 the	 mother	 of	 Khatotkacha,	 who	 had	 died	 unlamented.	 Now	 Draupadi,
born	 a	 princess,	 lay	 dying	 like	 the	 Rakshasi,	 uncared	 for,	 in	 this	 snowy
wilderness.	 Death	 was	 the	 great	 equaliser,	 it	 did	 not	 differentiate	 between	 a
princess	 and	 an	 untouchable.	 Bhima	 blinked	 his	 eyes,	 hardened	 his	 heart	 and
followed	his	brothers.
Sahadeva	slipped	 into	a	gorge	but	Yudhishtra	did	not	stop.	He	could	hear	 his
brother ’s	screams	as	he	fell.	The	other	Pandavas	wavered,	undecided	whether
to	follow	Yudhishtra	or	try	to	save	the	youngest.

“Attachment,	 even	 to	 a	 brother,	 is	 a	 sin.	 He	 is	 paying	 for	 his	 karma,”
Yudhishtra	 said	 and	 he	 continued	 walking.	 The	 wind	 howled	 through	 the
mountain	passes,	but	its	chill	was	nothing	compared	to	Yudhishtra’s	words.
He	was	far	ahead	with	the	dog,	Dharma,	when	Nakula	fell.	Bhima	cried	out	to
Yudhishtra	to	stop,	but	his	steps	only	became	firmer	as	he	climbed	higher.
Before	 Arjuna	 fell,	 he	 asked	 Yudhishtra,	 “What	 was	 my	 sin	 other	 than	 to
follow	 Krishna’s	 orders?”	 His	 brother	 had	 no	 answer	 except	 to	 say	 he	 must
have	committed	some	sin	in	this	or	a	previous	life.
When	 Bhima	 collapsed	 starving	 and	 dehydrated,	 Yudhishtra	 was	 tempted	 to
stop.	This	innocent	brother	had	earned	the	reputation	of	being	a	brute	for	his
sake.	 He	 had	 been	 a	 fool	 to	 do	 what	 others	 had	 asked	 him	 to,	 crushing	 those
pointed	out	to	him.	He	had	even	dishonoured	himself	by	smashing	his	cousin’s
thighs	 for	 Yudhishtra’s	 sake.	 If	 anyone	 had	 sinned	 without	 attachment,	 it	 was
Bhima.	 Yet,	 he	 too,	 had	 to	 die	 a	 miserable	 and	 lonely	 death	 in	 the	 cold
mountains.
***
The	 air	 had	 become	 thin	 and	 Yudhishtra’s	 limbs	 had	 become	 numb	 from	 the
cold.	Snow	fell	around	him	and	he	wheezed	as	he	climbed	higher.	The	tattered
blanket	was	of	little	use	in	this	weather.	Yudhishtra	had	triumphed	in	the	race	of
virtue.	He	was	the	son	of	dharma.	He	had	survived.	If	he	waited	patiently	in	the
snowy	 heights,	 the	 chariot	 from	 heaven	 would	 surely	 come	 to	 get	 him.	 The
lack	of	air	was	playing	tricks	with	his	brain.	Had	something	zoomed	past	him?
Was	 it	 a	 cloud	 or	 Indra’s	 chariot	 come	 to	 take	 him	 to	 heaven?	 Or	 had	 he
already	reached	his	heavenly	abode?	Ah,	the	chariot	had	indeed	come...
“You	have	come	to	take	me	to	heaven,”	Yudhishtra	smiled	and	whispered	into
the	oppressive	emptiness	around	him.	“I	am	coming,	but	I	bring	Dharma	with
me.”	His	voice	was	swallowed	by	the	snow-clad	mountains.	“Heaven,	receive
your	servant,”	he	cried	and	stepped	into	the	abyss,	taking	the	dog	with	him.
Silence	 descended	 as	 he	 vanished	 into	 the	 eternal	 snows.	 Nothing	 stirred	 for
some	time,	then	a	tiny	paw	came	over	the	edge	of	the	cliff,	then	a	muzzle.	The
blind	 dog	 hoisted	 itself	 up	 to	 safety.	 It	 sniffed	 the	 cold	 air	 and	 then,	 with

renewed	vigour,	started	on	its	journey	back	to	where	it	belonged.
*****

84 			GRAND	ALLIANCE
	
TAKSHAKA	 ANNOUNCED	 THAT	 HE	 WAS	 going	 to	 assassinate	 King	 Parikshat.	 To

make	his	act	more	daring,	and	to	increase	his	popularity	among	the	Nagas	and
others	struggling	under	Dhaumya	and	Yuyutsu’s	rule,	he	spread	the	news	and
even	 gave	 out	 the	 time	 of	 the	 assassination.	 He	 claimed	dharma	 was	 with	 the
Nagas.	Where	there	was	dharma,	there	would	be	victory.
As	 the	 day	 of	 reckoning	 approached,	 the	 security	 around	 the	 palace	 was
tightened	and	guards	roamed	the	streets,	arresting	suspicious-looking	persons.
The	palace	garden	was	dug	to	create	a	lake	and	the	King	lived	in	a	hastily-built
tower	 in	 its	 centre,	 from	 where	 the	 guards	 could	 see	 any	 approaching
assassins.	 Only	 a	 group	 of	 priests	 were	 allowed	 inside	 the	 tower.	 They
entertained	 the	 young	 King	 with	 stories	 of	 Krishna’s	 childhood.	 For	 seven
days,	they	talked	of	the	glory	of	Vaikunta	and	the	mercy	of	the	Lord.
Unknown	 to	 the	 young	 King,	 whose	 wife	 was	 pregnant,	 a	 wicked	 conspiracy
had	been	hatched.	Takshaka	was	desperate	for	a	victory	and	one	of	Yuyutsu’s
men	 became	 the	 mediator	 between	 the	 dreaded	 Naga	 and	 the	Rajaguru	 of	 the
Kurus.	Parikshat’s	death	would	serve	as	a	God-given	opportunity	for	Dhaumya
and	Yuyutsu	to	take	control	of	Bharatavarsha.	If	a	boy	was	born	to	Parikshat’s
wife,	 they	 could	 place	 the	 infant	 on	 the	 throne	 instead	 of	 Parikshat,	 who	 had
been	spoilt	by	Kripa.	If	it	was	a	girl,	it	would	be	even	better.	Soon,	it	became	a
necessity	to	Dhaumya,	even	more	than	to	Takshaka,	that	Parikshat	die.
Takshaka	entered	Parikshat’s	tower	on	the	seventh	day,	disguised	as	a	Brahmin,
walking	in	with	the	group	of	priests	who	came	to	tell	the	King	amazing	tales
about	 Krishna.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 a	 story	 that	 told	 of	 Krishna’s	 seven	 days	 of
miracles,	the	 saptaha,	Takshaka	 shot	a	poisoned	arrow	into	Parikshat’s	heart.
As	the	innocent	King	lay	writhing	in	pain,	Takshaka	was	allowed	to	escape	into
the	forest.

Some	 days	 after	 Parikshat’s	 cremation,	 his	 wife	 bore	 him	 a	 posthumous	 son.
By	 then,	 Yuyutsu,	 the	 Vaishya	 son	 of	 Dhritarashtra,	 had	 been	 declared	 the
Grand	 Regent	 of	 the	 Kurus.	 He	 allowed	 the	 coronation	 of	 the	 baby,
Janamejaya,	 as	 the	 last	 King	 of	 the	 Kurus,	 but	 he	 retained	 control	 and	 ruled
Bharatavarsha	 in	 consultation	 with	 Rajaguru	 Dhaumya.	 Where	 the	 great
Kshatriya,	Bhishma,	had	once	sat	in	splendour,	the	great	Vaishya	merchant	now
sat.	The	wheel	of	dharma	had	turned	full	circle.
***
“What	shall	we	do	with	this	senile	man?”	the	priest	asked	Dhaumya,	pointing	at
Parashurama.
Dhaumya	looked	at	the	man	who	had	once	held	the	entire	South	under	his	sway.
He	was	muttering	Karna’s	name.	“Take	him	back	to	the	South.	At	the	Krishna
River,	you	know	what	to	do.	He	will	become	immortal.”
“What	do	we	do	with	Vrishaketu,	Karna’s	son?”
“His	 mother	 is	 a	 Suta;	 he	 has	 no	 right	 to	 stay	 in	 the	 palace.	 Send	 him	 to	 the
stables.	Let	him	take	the	position	his	grandfather,	Athiratha,	once	held.”
The	priest	bowed	and	Dhaumya	turned	away.	He	had	far	more	important	things
to	 attend	 to	 than	 to	 listen	 to	 the	 mutterings	 of	 an	 old	 Guru	 or	 worry	 about	 a
Suta.	He	wondered	again	where	Kripa	could	be.	They	had	not	been	able	to	find
him	since	the	day	of	Parikshat’s	death.	He	had	vanished.	But	Dhaumya	felt	sure
that	one	day	he	would	find	the	maverick	Brahmin.	He	knocked	on	the	door	of
his	closest	ally.	“Grand	Regent	Yuyutsu,	we	need	your	help.	Now	that	Takshaka
has	 struck	 as	 he	 promised,	 he	 has	 given	 us	 a	 new	 opportunity	 to	 strike	 back.
The	fool	had	walked	into	our	trap.	What	is	your	opinion	on	a	Sarpasatra?”
“It	 would	 be	 a	 good	 thing,”	 Yuyutsu	 said,	 swirling	 the	 exotic	 soma	 in	 his
bejewelled	glass.
“Yuyutsu,	we	can	always	count	on	you.”
“I	am	just	a	Vaishya,	Guru.	I	keep	away	from	politics.	I	wear	the	title	of	Grand
Regent	like	a	crown	of	thorns.”

Dhaumya	paused,	licking	his	lips.	“I	am	aware	you	are	only	doing	your	duty,
but	you	will	have	to	take	on	more	responsibility	now	since	King	Janamejaya	is
just	a	baby.”
“As	you	say,	Guru,	as	you	say.	We	must	perform	the	Sarpasatra	and	sacrifice
the	Nagas.	We	can	eliminate	them	once	and	for	all.”
“Yuyutsu,	 there	 will	 be	 those	 who	 will	 say	 that	 such	 killings	 are	 against
dharma.”
“Oh,	we	can	call	them	terrorists	or	Rakshasas.	We	will	brand	them	as	traitors
and	blasphemers.”
“You	are	a	genius,	Yuyutsu.”
“I	am	just	a	merchant,	Guru.”
“Yes,	 but	 a	 merchant	 who	 can	 see	 which	 side	 will	 win.	 That	 is	 an	 invaluable
gift.”
“It	 is	 merely	 the	 difference	 between	 being	 an	 ordinary	 merchant	 and	 a	 great
merchant.	 I	 am	 a	 true	 Vaishya,	 just	 like	 you	 are	 a	 true	 Brahmin,	 Guru.
Together,	 we	 can	 rule	 this	 country	 well.	 Dharma	 and	 commerce	 will	 both	 be
served.”	Yuyutsu	took	another	sip	of	his	soma.
“People	need	Gods	and	avatars.	They	want	magic.”
“We	will	give	them	magic.	In	return,	they	will	give	us	their	freedom.	They	will
get	 what	 they	 deserve	 and	 we	 will	 get	 what	 we	 want.	 To	 the	 Sarpasatra,	 the
grand	sacrifice	of	Nagas.”	Yuyutsu	raised	his	glass	to	Dhaumya.
Takshaka	had	every	reason	to	worry.	He	had	competition.
***
Far	to	the	south,	in	a	small	village	called	Malanada,	a	little	girl	stood	watching
the	 King’s	 men	 demolish	 a	 temple.	 Her	 grandmother ’s	 grip	 on	 her	 wrist
became	 painful	 when	 the	 last	 brick	 fell.	 The	 villagers	 did	 not	 dare	 to	 even
murmur.	The	soldiers	threw	the	idols	into	the	lake.

Long	after	the	last	idol	came	to	rest	on	the	muddy	lake	bottom,	while	cicadas
chirped	 and	 frogs	 croaked,	 the	 girl	 asked	 the	 old	 woman	 why	 the	 men	 had
destroyed	the	village	temple.	It	was	raining	outside	and	she	lay	with	her	head	in
her	grandmother ’s	lap.
The	old	lady’s	eyes	glistened	with	tears.	“It	means	that	the	only	men	who	cared
for	us	are	dead.”
The	little	girl	stared	up	at	her	without	understanding.	Her	grandmother	ruffled
her	 hair.	 A	 wild	 beast	 howled	 in	 the	 forest	 beyond	 the	 village.	 “I	 am	 afraid,
Grandma,”	the	child	said,	gripping	the	old	woman’s	sari.
“Pray,	my	child.	It	will	ease	your	mind.”
“But	there	are	no	temples	or	Gods	left	to	pray	to,”	the	girl	said,	confused.
An	 image	 of	 the	 Prince	 who	 had	 relished	 the	 pot	 of	 toddy	 from	 her	 hands
flashed	 through	 the	 old	 woman’s	 mind.	 She	 smiled	 at	 her	 grandchild.	 “Some
gods	do	not	need	temples	or	priests.	Just	pray	they	will	be	born	again	among
us,	within	us.”
The	rain	drummed	on	the	thatch	roof.	‘I	hope	she	wakes	to	a	better	tomorrow,’
the	old	woman	sighed.
A	cold	wind	blew	in	from	the	lake,	extinguished	the	lamp	and	plunged	them	in
darkness.	The	symphony	of	the	rain	continued	outside,	unceasing,	uncaring.
***

85			RISE	OF	KALI
	
‘HAIL	KING	JANAMEJAYA!’	THE	CROWD	CRIED.	The	procession	was	spectacular	and

the	 crowd	 watching	 it	 was	 delirious	 with	 joy.	 Behind	 the	 baby	 King	 stood
Dhaumya,	looking	regal	with	his	flowing	white	beard	and	dazzling	ornaments.
Behind	the	Raj	Guru	stood	Yuyutsu,	the	merchant.	He	was	sponsoring	the	great
expedition.	Patriotic	songs	could	be	heard	from	the	onlookers.
“Janamejaya’s	 Sarpasatra!”	 Dhaumya	 raised	 his	 staff	 of	 office.	 The	 crowd
roared	back.
The	boy	King	blinked,	terrified	of	the	commotion.	He	did	not	know	they	were
going	into	battle.	He	would	rather	have	been	playing	with	his	new	toy	cart.
“The	 war	 of	 dharma	 has	 not	 ended,”	 Dhaumya	 cried,	 and	 heads	 nodded	 in
agreement.	 “The	 Nagas	 have	 killed	 King	 Parikshat.	 Our	 brave	 new	 King,
Janamejaya,	a	true	Kshatriya,	has	declared	war	on	the	Nagas.”
All	eyes	focused	on	the	little	boy	in	admiration.	He	wanted	to	cry	but	Dhaumya
had	 warned	 him	 against	 doing	 so	 in	 public.	 He	 was	 terrified	 of	 the	 old	 man
with	the	white	beard,	and	of	the	fat	merchant.	Abhimanyu’s	grandson	clutched
his	toy	cart	and	bit	his	lip	to	hold	back	his	tears.
“We	 will	 not	 spare	 a	 single	 Naga.	 This	 is	 the	 Sarpasatra	 of	 the	 great	 King
Janamejaya.	Hail	son	of	Parikshat,	grandson	of	Abhimanyu,	great-grandson	of
Arjuna!”	The	crowd	roared	in	approval.
Yuyutsu	smiled	as	he	saw	many	rushing	to	join	the	ranks.	They	were	eager	to
fight	for	dharma	and	kill	as	many	Nagas	as	possible.
It	was	going	to	be	another	great	war.	He	had	made	a	large	profit	on	the	last	one
but	 it	 had	 ended	 too	 soon,	 in	 just	 eighteen	 days.	 A	 long-drawn	 conflict
spanning	 the	 next	 few	 decades	 was	 what	 he	 wanted.	 Who	 knew,	 if	 his

successors	were	lucky,	it	could	even	simmer	perpetually.	Yuyutsu	could	almost
hear	the	jingle	of	gold	coins	falling	into	his	lap.
“Hail	dharma!”	Yuyutsu	cried,	and	the	crowd	thundered	back.	It	was	all	great
fun	 but	 he	 reminded	 himself	 to	 execute	 Takshaka’s	 order	 for	 arms	 and
weapons	as	early	as	possible.	Like	any	good	merchant,	he	was	hedging	his	bets
by	 supplying	 men	 to	 Dhaumya	 and	 arms	 to	 Takshaka.	 He	 would	 win,
irrespective	of	which	side	did.	How	he	loved	this	dharma	business!	He	would
build	 a	 few	 temples	 and	 throw	 in	 two	 or	 three	 charitable	 houses	 to	 feed
Brahmins	free.	Gratitude...a	merchant	should	always	be	grateful.
Takshaka	and	 his	men	were	hiding	 in	the	 kingdom	of	the	invalid	 King	Indra.
They	would	drag	the	Nagas	here,	have	some	fun,	and	terrify	anyone	who	dared
question	the	 varna	 system.	 Yuyutsu	 knew	 he	 would	 have	 to	 ensure	 Takshaka
was	freed	in	the	end,	so	the	anger	would	continue	to	simmer.	He	could	inflame
it	 whenever	 he	 wanted,	 whenever	 profits	 slumped.	 He	 had	 wasted	 his	 youth
travelling	to	many	countries	in	search	of	opportunities	when	it	was	right	here,
staring	 him	 in	 the	 face.	 His	 country	 was	 progressing	 and	 opportunities
abounded.	Good	times	were	coming.
***
Around	 the	 corner	 from	 where	 the	 procession	 was	 passing,	 a	 group	 of
teenagers	 shouted	 at	 a	 madman	 prattling	 to	 himself.	 People	 usually	 ignored
him;	 they	 had	 better	 things	 to	 do	 than	 stop	 and	 listen	 to	 the	 ramblings	 of	 the
crazy	 one.	 The	 man	 tried	 to	 shake	 off	 the	 kids	 following	 him	 by	 shouting	 at
them,	 but	 it	 only	 made	 them	 laugh	 louder.	 They	 knew	 the	 man	 was	 harmless
and	never	hurt	anyone,	especially	children.	He	still	had	the	broad	shoulders	and
long	 arms	 of	 the	 warrior	 he	 had	 once	 been.	 Perhaps	 he	 had	 even	 fought	 in
some	war.	Nobody	knew	his	history	and	nobody	cared.	He	was	one	of	the	many
milling	around	in	the	dusty	streets	of	Hastinapura.	He	was	a	madman	who	did
not	 strike	 back	 even	 when	 they	 pelted	 him	 with	 stones.	 Now	 just	 to	 entertain
themselves,	the	teenagers	pretended	they	were	interested	in	hearing	what	he	had
to	say.	It	would	be	fun	to	laugh	at	his	ramblings.
“Fools!”	 the	 man	 said,	 addressing	 no	 one	 in	 particular.	 The	 teenagers
snickered.	“Where	are	you	running	off	to,	you	boys?	Listen	to	me,	for	I	have	a
story	 to	 tell.	 Do	 not	 go	 away.	 Let	 me	 tell	 you	 the	 story	 of	 a	 few	 friends	 who

wanted	to	change	the	world.	One	was	a	Brahmin,	one	a	Suta,	another	a	Nishada;
but	the	best	among	them	was	a	Kshatriya.”
The	teenagers	laughed.	They	knew	the	best	part	was	coming.
“Listen	 to	 the	 story	 of	 Suyodhana,	 the	 best	 among	 men.”	 The	 crazy	 one
ignored	 the	 laughter	 and	 continued,	 “Hear	 the	 story	 of	 Karna,	 the	 man	 who
gave	away	everything,	even	his	life,	so	the	world	would	know	the	true	meaning
of	 friendship.	 Hear	 the	 story	 of	 the	 Nishada	 whose	 thumb	 was	 cut	 off	 so	 he
would	 never	 challenge	 the	 Kshatriyas	 who	 considered	 themselves	 to	 be	 the
greatest	 by	 accident	 of	 birth.	 Hear	 the	 story	 of	 Ekalavya,	 the	 Nishada	 who
challenged	 the	 Gods	 and	 his	 destiny,	 only	 to	 give	 his	 life	 for	 a	 woman’s
honour.	 Hear	 the	 story	 of	 Suyodhana,	 who	 staked	 his	 inheritance	 and	 empire
for	what	he	believed	to	be	true,	who	stood	by	his	friends	and	fought	for	all	of
you.	Hear	the	story	of	the	man	who	looked	into	the	eyes	of	Krishna	and	said
that	he	was	wrong,	who	did	not	even	flinch	when	his	thighs	were	broken.	And
if	you	have	time,	hear	my	story	–	of	a	poor	Brahmin	who	defied	his	father	and
led	his	men	to	the	cold	heights	of	Gandhara	for	the	sake	of	his	country;	hear
about	Aswathama’s	life.”
A	 stone	 hit	 Aswathama’s	 forehead	 and	 the	 teenagers	 howled	 in	 merriment.
Wiping	 away	the	trickle	 of	 blood	with	the	back	of	his	hand,	he	said,	 “Before
throwing	stones,	read	what	the	great	sage	Vedavyasa	has	written.	Read	it	before
they	 take	 away	 your	 ability	 to	 read	 at	 all.	 Read	 your	 scriptures	 before	 they
change	everything,	keeping	you	ignorant.	Why	did	the	great	sage	call	his	epic
‘Jaya’?	 Could	 there	 be	 anything	 more	 ironic	 than	 calling	 it	 ‘Victory’?	 Who
won	 the	 Great	 War	 –	 the	 great,	 bloody,	 Mahabharata	 war?	 Did	 the	 Pandavas
win?	If	they	did,	why	did	they	leave	everything	to	a	merchant	and	a	priest	and
run	away?	Did	Krishna	and	his	dharma	win?	If	so,	where	is	Dwaraka,	today?
Gone!	So	who	won?	Shakuni,	the	Mlecha?	Read	again	what	the	great	sage	has
written.	Fools!	Think	who	won…	Was	it	dharma	or	Dhaumya?	Was	it	Krishna
or	 Yuyutsu?	 What	 has	 become	 of	 Krishna’s	 people?	 The	 Yadavas	 butchered
each	other	to	death	but	he	could	not	save	them.	Neither	could	the	great	warrior
Arjuna	save	Krishna’s	wives	from	the	marauding	tribes	of	Durjaya.	Read	Jaya
again,	you	dirty	urchins,	before	they	take	the	last	book	from	you.	Who	won	the
war?	Ask	yourself.”
The	 teenagers	 looked	 at	 each	 other.	 Aswathama	 kicked	 over	 an	 overflowing

garbage	bin	and	tried	to	balance	himself	on	it,	drawing	more	laughter.	“Do	not
laugh,	you	fools!	For	I	am	Aswathama,	the	Brahmin	cursed	with	immortality.	I
am	cursed,	for	I	murdered	the	Pandavas’	five	sons	in	their	sleep.	It	was	a	sin
graver	than	annihilating	Khandivaprastha.	Those	who	died	in	Khandiva	do	not
matter,	 for	 they	 were	 just	 some	 Nagas,	 terrorists	 and	 untouchables...some
beasts	 and	 birds.	 Trapping	 Nishada	 children	 and	 their	 mother	 in	 a	 house	 and
setting	them	on	fire	is	not	adharma.	Lying	to	your	Guru	and	cutting	his	throat
when	 he	 collapses,	 believing	 your	 lie,	 is	 of	 course	 dharma!	 Oh,	 what	 some
men	sacrifice	for	dharma!”
Aswathama	clapped	his	hands	thrice	and	called	out	to	the	pedestrians	hurrying
past.	 Some	 looked	 at	 him,	 fear	 in	 their	 eyes,	 others	 with	 contempt.	 “Ask
whether	it	was	right	to	bring	Shikandi,	who	was	neither	a	man	nor	a	woman,	to
face	Bhishma.	Ask	whether	a	great	warrior	like	Arjuna,	using	an	eunuch	as	a
shield	 and	 to	 shoot	 Bhishma,	 was	dharma?	 And	 what	 is	 the	 answer	 you	 get?
‘Oh,	 but	 the	 fall	 of	 Bhishma	 was	 necessary	 for	 dharma	 to	 win.’	 Tchaw!	 The
war	was	not	necessary.	We	had	blown	the	cover	of	the	Pandavas	during	the	last
days	 of	 their	 exile.	 But	 then,	 dharma	 for	 you	 means	 changing	 the	 calendar
itself	to	win.”
One	of	the	boys	laughed.	Aswathama	glared	at	him.	“Don’t	grin	like	a	monkey,
fool!	Your	future	is	doomed.	Your	country	is	ruined.	You	dare	laugh	at	the	fall
of	 Suyodhana	 and	 all	 the	 noble	 men	 like	 Bhishma,	 my	 father,	 Karna,	 and	 the
others	 who	 fought	 for	 him?	 Read	 Jaya	 to	 know	 how	 Karna	 rejected	 the
temptation	to	become	Emperor	and	instead	chose	to	stand	by	the	man	who	had
given	 him	 everything	 when	 he	 had	 nothing.	 Read	 how	 Karna	 was	 trapped	 by
own	 nobility,	 how	 impossible	 promises	 were	 extracted	 from	 him;	 know	 how
he	was	shot	while	extracting	the	wheel	of	his	chariot	that	was	stuck	in	the	mud.
Know	 that	 Arjuna	 did	 not	 keep	 his	 word,	 as	 any	 honourable	 warrior	 would
have	 done,	 when	 he	 failed	 to	 kill	 Jayadratha	 before	 sunset,	 hiding	 behind	 the
lame	 excuse	 that	 the	 sunset	 had	 been	maya,	 an	 illusion	 created	 by	 an	 avatar.
Sleep	in	your	beds	peacefully	by	all	means,	if	your	conscience	still	allows	you
to	do	so,	you	lucky	devils.”
There	 were	 murmurings	 among	 the	 sparse	 crowd	 of	 men	 and	 boys	 who	 had
gathered	to	hear	Aswathama.
“I	am	ashamed	for	what	we	did	to	Draupadi.	We	deserved	punishment	for	what

we	 did	 to	 a	 helpless	 woman.	 We	 were	 drunk	 with	 power	 and	 victory	 and	 we
tried	to	strip	her	in	the	Sabha.	We	did	an	evil	thing	that	day.	But	does	one	act
make	 us	 evil	 for	 all	 time?	 It	 is	 said	 that	 noble	 men	 like	 Bhishma	 and	 Drona
were	killed	for	staying	silent	when	a	woman	was	being	dishonoured.	But	then
why	 does	 no	 one	 talk	 of	 Lakshmana	 and	 her	 shame?	 Was	 she	 not	 a	 woman,
too?	Why	does	no	one	speak	of	the	Nishada	woman	who	was	burned	with	her
children?	 Was	 she	 not	 a	 woman?	 Some	 blame	 Draupadi’s	 mocking	 of
Suyodhana	 and	 Karna	 for	 the	 war.	 How	 convenient	 to	 put	 the	 blame	 for	 the
madness	 of	 men	 on	 a	 woman!	 Why	 do	 you	 think	 the	 war	 was	 only	 about	 the
Kauravas?	 Let	 us	 talk	 about	 Khatotkacha,	 the	 Rakshasa	 son	 of	 Bhima,	 of
Iravan.	 He	 was	 Arjuna’s	 son,	 but	 because	 he	 was	 of	 low	 caste,	 he	 was
sacrificed.	 What	 if	 Iravan	 had	 proved	 himself	 a	 greater	 warrior	 than	 all	 the
Kshatriyas?	Then	what	would	have	happened	to	your	ideas	about	caste?	It	was
better	 to	 sacrifice	 the	 boy	 before	 the	 war	 started.	 Does	 all	 this	 sound	 like
dharma	to	you?”
The	crowd	was	dangerously	silent.
“The	next	time	you	hear	the	immortal	story	of	Bharata,	pause	to	think	whether
it	was	dharma	to	break	the	thighs	of	a	man	who	had	always	played	fair,	a	man
who	could	have	easily	chosen	any	of	the	Pandava	brothers	to	duel	with	instead
of	Bhima,	but	he	chose	fairly	even	when	he	knew	everything	was	lost.”
“Stop	all	this	nonsensical	talk!”	someone	shouted	at	Aswathama.
“You	 can	 shut	 my	 mouth	 but	 can	 you	 shut	 my	 thoughts	 or	 the	 doubts	 that
confuse	anyone	with	a	fair	mind?	The	next	time	you	read	the	great	story	of	our
country,	 read	 about	 the	 sinner,	 Aswathama.	 What	 I	 did	 was	 ignoble,	 I	 should
never	 have	 killed	 the	 Pandava	 boys.	 I	 have	 been	 cursed	 with	 a	 conscience.	 I
would	have	escaped	my	fate	had	I	too	had	a	friend	who	could	justify	my	black
deed	with	scriptures.	Alas,	my	friend	was	a	mere	mortal,	an	ignorant	and	evil
man	who	knew	no	dharma.	Even	when	he	was	dying,	he	did	not	condone	my
act.	He	said	I	should	have	fought	fair	and	won	or	died	as	he	was	doing.	I	carry
his	 sadness	 as	 a	 curse	 on	 my	 head	 just	 as	 I	 carry	 my	 conscience.	 I	 have	 no
cloak	of	dharma	to	hide	my	shame.	My	body	is	full	of	sores	but	I	don’t	even
deserve	death.”
“Kill	 this	 sinner!	 Kill	 this	 liar!”	 shouted	 a	 few	 priests	 who	 had	 assembled,

drawn	by	rumours	about	a	tirade	against	dharma.
“Liar?	I	am	the	liar?	Ha!	The	next	time	you	read	Vyasa’s	great	epic,	read	with
your	eyes	open.	I	shall	be	there	with	you	whenever	the	story	is	told.	I	will	be
standing	 near	 you,	 whispering	 to	 your	 conscience	 to	 read	 between	 the	 lines.
When	you	watch	plays	glorifying	the	Pandavas	and	their	dharma,	you	will	feel
the	gnawing	of	doubt	in	your	mind.	Know	that	I	am	that	doubt.	When	you	pray,
you	will	see	the	lamp	flicker;	I	am	the	breeze	that	makes	it	dance.	Do	not	say	I
have	not	warned	you.	As	long	as	the	great	epic	is	read,	Aswathama	will	live,
the	 Brahmin	 cursed	 with	 immortality	 will	 be	 there,	 looking	 over	 your
shoulder.	You	will	not	see	me,	but	I	will	possess	your	mind.	I	am	everlasting
doubt	as	well	as	the	eternal	logic	of	the	reasoning	mind.	I	am	Aswathama,	the
cursed.”
The	 crowd	 stood	 still,	 shocked	 by	 the	 madman’s	 words.	 Insanity	 was	 a
dangerous	thing.	The	first	stone	caught	Aswathama	on	the	bridge	of	his	nose.
He	gasped	as	the	next	one	hit	his	mouth,	shattering	a	tooth.	Before	he	could	run
for	cover	a	hailstorm	of	stones	hit	him	and	the	crowd	rushed	at	him	to	stomp
him	 out.	 They	 beat	 him	 with	 sticks	 and	 stones,	 anything	 they	 could	 lay	 their
hands	on.	Still	he	refused	to	die,	Aswathama,	the	immortal.	He	was	saved	by	the
sound	 of	 a	 conch.	 His	 tormentors	 turned	 towards	 the	 sound	 and	 a	 cheer	 rose
when	they	saw	the	golden	chariot	with	the	baby	King	and	the	army	marching
behind.
As	the	procession	moved	on,	Yuyutsu	saw	a	Brahmin	lying	near	an	overturned
garbage	bin,	bleeding.	‘Must	be	drunk,’	he	thought.	He	turned	his	attention	back
to	 building	 up	 the	 enthusiasm	 of	 the	 crowd.	 The	 juggernaut	 rolled	 on.
Nevertheless,	 the	 sacred	 thread	 across	 the	 man’s	 shoulder	 was	 an	 insult	 to
dharma	and	he	ordered	a	guard	to	break	it.	The	man	rushed	over	to	the	prone
figure	and	tugged	at	the	sacred	thread	until	it	snapped.	Then	he	hurried	back,
almost	stumbling	over	a	dog	that	had	somehow	slipped	through	the	procession.
It	yelped	at	him	but	a	kick	in	its	ribs	was	enough	to	scare	it	away.
Yuyutsu	looked	at	the	fallen	Brahmin	one	last	time	and	was	surprised	to	see	an
untouchable	 sitting	 near	 him,	 a	 dog	 with	 him.	 ‘Good,’	 he	 thought,	 the	 sinner
was	going	to	die	with	an	untouchable	polluting	him	at	the	time	of	death.	God
was	meting	out	deserving	punishment	to	all	sinners.	God	was	great.

***
Jara	tried	to	wake	Aswathama.	“Swami,	Swami,”	he	cried	as	he	fumbled	for	the
pot	of	water	he	carried.	It	was	dry.	He	was	afraid	to	touch	the	Brahmin,	the	loss
of	his	sacred	thread	notwithstanding.	How	could	he	wake	the	Brahmin	without
touching	him?	Jara	remembered	the	flute	Krishna	had	given	him	and	he	pulled
it	 out	 of	 his	 bundle.	 He	 nudged	 the	 prone	 figure	 on	 the	 ground	 with	 it	 and
slowly,	Aswathama	stirred.	The	dog	wagged	his	tail.
“Swami,	wake	up.	Open	your	eyes.	Look...	my	Dharma	is	back.”
Aswathama’s	 eyes	 flared	 with	 anger	 when	 he	 heard	 dharma	 mentioned.	 With
surprising	 swiftness	 he	 sat	 up,	 a	 scowl	 on	 his	 bleeding	 face.	 When	 he
understood	 the	 beggar	 had	 meant	 his	 blind	 dog,	 Aswathama’s	 face	 finally
broke	 into	 a	 smile.	 The	 procession	 was	 thundering	 past	 near	 them,	 raising
clouds	of	dust	to	the	heavens.	He	coughed,	vomited	blood,	and	then	fell	back.
Jara	did	not	hesitate,	he	lifted	the	Brahmin,	trying	to	drag	him	away	from	the
road,	away	from	the	march	of	dharma.	Jara	knew	the	Brahmin	had	not	fainted
because	 of	 the	 injuries	 he	 had	 received	 during	 the	 lynching;	 he	 had	 seen	 the
look	of	hunger	in	Aswathama’s	eyes.	No	one	knew	more	about	hunger	than	he
did.	 Jara	 fumbled	 with	 his	 bundle	 and	 brought	 out	 the	 cooked	 rice	 he	 had
collected	the	previous	day.	He	spread	a	banana	leaf	on	the	dusty	pavement	and
then	shook	Aswathama	awake.
The	 procession	 had	 gathered	 speed	 and	 the	 slogans	 were	 deafening,	 shaking
the	 ground.	 Thunder	 sounded,	 cracking	 open	 the	 secret	 vault	 of	 heaven.	 Rain
lashed	the	streets.	The	crowd	roared	in	excitement.	It	was	a	sign	from	the	Gods
that	 this	 was	 a	 righteous	 war.	 The	 wind	 howled.	 The	 last	 chariot	 passed	 the
fallen	Brahmin	and	the	beggar,	splashing	dirty	water	over	them	both.	Dharma
stood	up,	thereby	preventing	the	little	food	they	had	from	getting	soiled.	When
the	procession	had	become	a	dot	in	the	distance,	the	dog	shook	himself	dry	and
then	went	to	sit	beside	its	master,	eager	to	be	fed.
“Krishna,”	 Jara	 prayed	 and	 Aswathama’s	 eyes	 flashed	 with	 anger.	 He	 tried	 to
get	up	but	fell	back	weakly.	“Krishna,	you	have	come	before	us	as	food,	as	this
Brahmin.	You	are	love.	You	are	compassion.	I	offer	this	rice	to	you.	Itham	na
mama.”

The	 untouchable	 began	 to	 feed	 the	 Brahmin	 as	 Dharma	 the	 blind	 dog	 waited
patiently.
Ithi	mama	Mahabharata	Katha
Sambhavami	Yuge	Yuge	
This	is	the	story	of	my	Great	Bharata.
It	happens	in	all	ages.
*****

	

Afterword	
DHARMA	¬	
A	SUBTLE	CONCEPT
	
THERE	IS	NOTHING	IN	INDIA	that	has	sparked	more	debate	than	the	concept
of	dharma.	It	is	a	word	that	stands	alone.	Before	the	Bhakti	movement	rewrote
the	Ramayana	and	Mahabharata	as	stories	where	dharma	wins	over	adharma,
the	very	concept	of	dharma	used	to	be	debated	vigorously.	The	Mahabharata	is
an	example	of	each	side	believing	they	had	dharma	with	them	and	they	fought
for	 that.	 Kurukshetra	 is	 thus	 considered	 to	 be	 dharmakshetra,	 a	 place	 where
two	definitions	of	dharma	faced	each	other.
Duryodhana	famously	asks	Krishna	that	if	following	swadharma	or	dharma	as
defined	by	one’s	heart	is	the	greatest	dharma,	was	he	not	doing	his	Kshatriya
duty	 by	 trying	 to	 protect	 his	 inheritance?	 The	 conventional	 argument	 from
traditionalists	is	that	dharma	is	based	on	the	Vedas.	Krishna	answers	Arjuna’s
scepticism	 about	 dharma	 and	 adharma	 by	 saying	 that	 the	 scriptures	 are	 the
authority	for	deciding	this.	Narada,	the	divine	saint,	also	says	to	Yudhishtra	that
dharma	has	three	cornerstones	or	thrayi	mula:	the	Rig,	Yajur	and	Sama	Vedas.
The	Vedas	are	the	roots	of	dharma.	However,	the	counter	argument	to	this	is
given	in	the	Mahabharata	itself,	when	Bhishma	says	dharma	is	the	root	of	the
Vedas.	Once	we	accept	this	argument,	then	dharma	becomes	a	dynamic	concept
that	evolves	over	time,	depending	on	the	needs	of	the	people.	So	the	dharma	of
the	Vedas	served	the	needs	of	the	people	of	the	time,	but	the	dharma	of	today
may	be	different.	Krishna	also	says	that	dharma	changes	with	time	and	place,
though	he	is	quick	to	add	that	the	scriptures	are	the	final	authority.
In	 the	 Anusashasana	 Parva,	 Bhishma	 says	 to	 Yudhishtra	 that	 only	 Kala,	 the
Lord	of	Death	(or	Yama,	the	God	of	Yamam,	a	measure	of	time),	can	decide
what	dharma	or	adharma	is,	mere	mortals	cannot	understand	it.	It	is	Time	that
decides	 how	 humans	 are	 punished	 or	 rewarded	 for	 their	 karma	 or	 actions.
Everything	happens	due	to	some	cause.	Only	time	can	reveal	whether	one	has
acted	 as	 per	 dharma	 or	 not.	 This	 law,	 though	 logical,	 offers	 no	 solace	 to
anyone.	 Every	 action	 becomes	 a	 shot	 in	 the	 dark	 as	 we	 cannot	 tell	 what	 the

results	 will	 be.	 Krishna	 offers	 an	 antidote	 to	 this	 confusion	 by	 advising
nishkama	 karma	 or	 acting	 without	 worrying	 over	 the	 outcome,	 as	 acts	 of
devotion.	This	serves	those	who	are	confused	about	what	action	to	take	when
faced	with	a	dilemma,	but	it	can	be	a	dangerous	tool	in	the	hands	of	others.	In
British	India,	thugs	often	argued	that	they	were	dacoits	by	jati	and	looting	was
their	kula	dharma.	All	wars	and	violence	can	be	justified	using	the	argument	of
dharma.
In	 contrast,	 Balarama	 says	 ahimsa	 is	 the	 greatest	 dharma.	 His	 argument
becomes	 relevant	 when	 we	 consider	 the	 lives	 of	 the	 women	 in	 the
Mahabharata.	 It’s	 a	 man’s	 world,	 where	 women	 get	 abducted,	 pawned,
stripped,	widowed	and	raped.	All	the	Pandava	and	Kaurava	progeny	are	male,
with	 the	 sole	 exception	 of	 Dushala,	 as	 are	 Karna’s	 children.	 How	 can	 one
account	 for	 this	 improbable	 imbalance?	 It	 is	 ironic	 that	 except	 in	 the	 case	 of
Draupadi,	no	other	acts	of	violence	against	women	are	debated	within	the	fine
definitions	 of	 dharma.	 The	 Nishada	 woman	 and	 her	 children	 are	 quickly
forgotten,	 the	 thousands	 of	 women	 and	 children	 who	 die	 in	 Khandivaprastha
are	 never	 mentioned	 again.	 Even	 the	 fate	 of	 Gandhari,	 abducted	 and	 forcibly
married	 to	 a	 blind	 man,	 is	 not	 spoken	 of	 except	 to	 praise	 her	 for	 being	 a
pativrata	 who	 denied	 herself	 the	 sight	 her	 husband	 did	 not	 have.	 When
Krishna’s	wives	are	abducted	by	dacoits	or	when	Sushala	loses	her	only	son,	it
is	they	who	suffer.	Some	things	never	seem	to	change,	even	in	the	twenty-first
century.
The	 counter	 argument	 to	 Balarama’s	 ahimsa	 is:	 can	 a	 ruler	 be	 non-violent?
How	 can	 he	 then	 chastise	 wrongdoers?	 Another	 argument	 which	 frequently
surfaces	 is	 the	 breaking	 of	 dharma	 when	 faced	 with	 danger,	 called	 apad
dharma.	 When	 one	 needs	to	 protect	one’s	kin,	is	it	 not	 right	 to	use	violence?
The	epic	keeps	throwing	up	questions	and	from	every	answer	more	questions
sprout	 up.	 There	 is	 no	 absolute	 right	 or	 wrong	 in	 Vyasa’s	 Mahabharata,
echoed	in	Shakespeare’s	line	from	Hamlet:	There	is	nothing	either	good	or	bad
but	thinking	makes	it	so.
Yudhishtra	 dealt	 with	 this	 confusion	 by	 following	 tradition,	 by	 acting	 in	 the
time-tested	way.	He	says	to	Drupada	that	he	does	not	understand	dharma	as	it	is
very	 subtle.	 He	 chooses	 to	 follow	 the	 path	 of	 his	 forefathers	 and	 strives	 to
speak	 only	 the	 truth.	 It	 is	 thus	 natural	 that	 such	 a	 staunch	 traditionalist	 comes
into	 conflict	 with	 Suyodhana,	 who	 wanted	 to	 change	 everything.	 He	 was

willing	 to	 make	 a	 Suta	 a	 king,	 befriend	 a	 Nishada,	 and	 allow	 a	 Brahmin	 to
wield	 the	 bow.	 Briefly,	 he	 makes	 Aswathama	 King	 of	 Uttara	 Panchala.	 It	 is
evident	he	follows	his	heart.	He	is	a	creature	of	passion,	not	a	man	of	logic.	He
admits	this	many	times	in	the	epic.	Suyodhana	is	a	man	of	extremes;	he	loves
his	 friends	 unconditionally	 and	 hates	 his	 enemies	 with	 heartfelt	 passion.	 For
such	 a	 man	 there	 is	 no	 confusion	 about	 what	 is	 right	 or	 wrong.	 His	 heart
guides	him.
Confusion	comes	to	those	like	Arjuna,	Karna,	Aswathama	and	Yudhishtra,	who
struggle	with	their	conscience.	Was	it	not	Karna’s	dharma	to	protect	his	friend
and	refuse	to	give	his	word	not	to	kill	all	the	Pandavas	to	Kunti?	On	the	other
hand,	was	it	not	Karna’s	dharma	to	side	with	his	brothers	when	Kunti	revealed
he	was	her	son?	And	Yudhishtra	says	that	had	he	known	Karna	was	his	brother
he	 would	 not	 have	 claimed	 the	 throne.	 The	 enigmatic	 question	 thus	 remains,
had	 Suyodhana	 known	 Karna	 was	 his	 eldest	 cousin,	 how	 would	 he	 have
reacted?	Krishna	rejects	the	claim	that	Karna	was	never	a	Pandava,	as	he	was
born	 before	 Kunti’s	 marriage,	 thus	 making	 Karna’s	 sacrifice	 meaningless.
Moreover,	was	Aswathama	right	in	killing	Draupadi’s	sons	in	revenge?	Was	he
right	 in	 trying	 to	 prove	 his	 loyalty	 to	 his	 friend	 by	 committing	 such	 a
condemnable	act?	Was	he	or	the	Pandavas	who	killed	the	Nishadas,	dharmic?
Additionally,	Yuyutsu,	Dhritarashtra’s	Vaishya	son’s	emergence	as	the	ultimate
victor	is	yet	another	irony	of	the	epic.
The	greatness	of	Vedavyasa’s	work	is	in	the	questions	it	evokes	every	time	we
read	 it,	 rather	 than	 in	 the	 answers	 given	 by	 preachers	 who	 reduce	 it	 to	 a
simplistic	tale	of	good	versus	evil.	Such	explanations	do	great	injustice	to	the
genius	 of	 Vyasa.	 I	 believe	 such	 explanations	 are	 the	 result	 of	 non-Indian
influences	on	our	psyche,	the	after-product	of	a	wounded	civilisation.	It	may	be
noted	that	the	rise	of	the	Bhakti	movement	coincided	with	the	Islamic	conquest
of	India.	The	open-minded	rationalism	of	Indian	thought	went	into	hiding	and
blind	devotion	took	its	place.	The	blurred	lines	of	dharma	and	adharma	and	the
speculative	 philosophy	 that	 thrived	 in	 debate	 and	 delighted	 generations	 of	 a
confident	 civilisation,	 slowly	 gave	 way	 to	 absolute	 definitions	 of	 good	 and
evil,	which	are	almost	a	Semitic	concept	and	the	hallmark	of	religious	beliefs
in	the	Middle	East.
Ironically,	 it	 is	 in	 the	 villages	 of	 India	 that	 the	 willingness	 to	 think	 from	 all
angles	 and	 points	 of	 view	 still	 thrives.	 In	 the	 course	 of	 my	 travels	 to	 remote

villages,	I	once	met	a	sadhu	who	refused	to	tell	me	his	name.	I	met	him	near	the
Gokarna	temple	and	we	had	an	interesting	chat.	When	he	asked	me	what	I	did,	I
said	 I	 reinterpreted	 the	 epics	 from	 the	 loser ’s	 point	 of	 view.	 He	 laughed	 and
asked	me	why	I	wrote.	He	also	asked	who	the	loser	was	in	any	of	our	Puranas
and	who	the	winner?	When	I	said	that	Ravana	and	Duryodhana	were	the	losers,
he	laughed	and	asked	me	to	read	the	epics	again	and	again	until	I	understood
them.	There	were	no	victors	or	vanquished,	just	people	and	their	lives,	he	said.
I	 mentioned	 that	 I	 felt	 an	 empathy	 for	 the	 vanquished	 and	 wished	 to	 present
their	side	as	well.
In	reply,	true	to	the	best	traditions	of	our	country,	he	told	me	an	old	Kannada
folktale.	 It	 was	 about	 Barbarika,	 the	 son	 of	 Khatotkacha,	 who	 comes	 to	 fight
alongside	the	Pandavas	against	the	Kauravas.	He	was	a	formidable	warrior	and
could	 win	 the	 war	 single	 handedly,	 but	 he	 has	 a	 great	 weakness.	 He	 was	 so
compassionate	that	he	could	 not	stand	to	see	anyone	defeated.	He	was	always
the	 champion	 of	 the	 underdog.	 He	 supported	 the	 Pandavas	 because	 the
Kauravas	 had	 more	 men	 fighting	 on	 their	 side;	 the	 Pandavas	 were	 the
underdogs	when	the	war	began.	But	with	his	help,	the	Pandavas	start	winning
against	the	Kauravas.
When	Barbarika	sees	the	fallen	faces	of	the	Kauravas,	he	feels	pity	and	changes
sides	to	fight	against	the	Pandavas.
Then	it	is	the	Pandavas’	turn	to	lose.	Barbarika	feels	pity	stir	for	the	Pandavas
and	 changes	 sides	 once	 again.	 This	 continues,	 causing	 frustration	 on	 both
sides.	 The	 war	 could	 never	 end	 if	 Barbarika	 kept	 supporting	 the	 losing	 side.
Fed	up	with	Barbarika’s	actions,	the	warriors	approached	Krishna	to	solve	the
impasse.	Krishna	called	Barbarika	and	asked	him	why	he	was	acting	in	such	a
bizarre	fashion.	Barbarika	says	he	is	unable	to	see	anyone	vanquished.	Krishna
takes	 him	 to	 a	 higher	 plane	 and	 shows	 him	 the	 larger	 picture.	 From	 this
vantage	 point,	 Barbarika	 sees	 that	 both	 sides	 are	 right	 and	 both	 sides	 wrong,
that	both	are	victors	and	vanquished,	dharmic	and	adharmic.	Confused,	he	asks
Krishna	what	he	is	then	fighting	for.	Krishna	answers	that	what	he	sees	is	maya,
the	illusion	of	life,	at	once	fascinating	and	confusing.	No	one	can	decide	what
is	dharma	and	what	is	adharma,	who	is	the	victor	and	who	is	the	vanquished.
Mortals	are	but	tiny	specks	in	the	vast	universe,	blips	in	the	great	ocean	of	time.
Disgusted,	Barbarika	asks	Krishna	to	behead	him	and	raise	his	head	on	a	pole
so	that	he	can	watch	the	fools	who	kill	each	other	and	laugh	at	them	and	at	the

illusion	of	life.	Krishna	asks	Bhima	to	do	so.	Barbarika’s	head	thus	witnesses
the	rest	of	the	war,	laughing	ceaselessly	at	the	folly	of	the	men	on	both	sides.
The	sadhu	 smiled	 at	 me	 and	 said,	 “Son,	 if	 those	 who	 passionately	 argue	 for
one	side	or	another,	care	to	pause	in	their	arguments,	they	will	hear	Barbarika
laughing	and	mocking	them.”
It	 was	 a	 revelation	 to	 me,	 another	 of	 the	 wonderful	 stories	 that	 never	 fail	 to
surprise	me.	The	fact	that	the	story	was	very	similar	to	that	of	Iravan,	which	is
another	 popular	 tale	 in	 Tamil	 Nadu	 and	 Kerala,	 may	 be	 incidental.	 In	 Tamil
Nadu,	the	cult	of	Iravan	is	the	most	prominent	of	all	village	cults.	The	idol	of
Iravan,	 locally	 known	 as	 Aravan,	 often	 10	 to	 15	 feet	 tall,	 stands	 guard	 at	 the
entrance	 of	 many	 Tamil	 villages.	 People	 unfamiliar	 with	 Tamil	 culture	 often
mistake	the	statue	of	Aravan	for	Ravana.	Aravan	is	considered	a	guardian	God,
the	God	of	Koothu,	the	village	dance	form,	and	the	protector	of	women.	He	is
also	 a	 God	 of	 harvest.	 In	 some	 parts	 of	 Tamil	 Nadu,	 he	 is	 associated	 with
transgenders.
In	 Kerala,	 Iravan	 is	 linked	 to	 death	 and	 he	 is	 the	 bird	 locally	 known	 as
Kalankozhi	 (Mottled	 Wood	 Owl).	 Kalankozhi	 or	 the	 bird	 of	 death,	 is
considered	to	be	none	other	than	the	son	of	Arjuna,	who	was	sacrificed	before
the	great	Mahabharata	war.	The	bird	is	a	harbinger	of	death.	I	still	remember
lying	 trembling	 in	 my	 bed,	 listening	 to	 the	 haunting	 cries	 of	 the	 Kalankozhi,
afraid	that	the	morning	would	bring	news	of	some	death.	Now	the	groves	that
nestled	 such	 birds	 have	 vanished,	 swept	 away	 by	 rural	 development	 and	 a
generation	disdainful	of	tradition.	Along	with	the	sacred	groves	and	the	birds
of	death,	the	water	too	has	vanished	from	the	village	wells.	Although	the	state
receives	more	rain	than	most	parts	of	the	world,	drought	is	a	harsh	reality	now.
In	 modern	 India,	 where	 there	 are	 only	 absolutes	 of	 right	 and	 wrong,	 and
everything	has	become	‘us	versus	them’	rather	than	the	accommodative	culture
of	our	ancestors,	the	old	traditions	are	slowly	vanishing	with	the	Kalankozhi.
But	 everyone	 and	 every	 faith	 has	 a	 place	 in	 the	 great	 mosaic	 of	 our	 culture.
Nothing	 is	 absolutely	 right	 or	 wrong.	 We	 may	 perhaps	 need	 the	 head	 of
Barbarika	 to	 see	 the	 bigger	 picture.	 My	 attempt	 here	 has	 been	 to	 show	 that
another	 side	 exists	 to	 our	 stories,	 as	 important	 and	 as	 relevant	 as	 the
conventional	 tale.	 Stories,	 I	 believe,	 should	 be	 about	 questions,	 never	 about
answers.	 Every	 answer	 should	 give	 birth	 to	 a	 hundred	 questions.	 That	 is	 the

mark	of	a	confident	civilisation	and	that	is	how	we,	the	sons	and	daughters	of
Bharatavarsha,	have	always	celebrated	our	stories	–	with	debate,	argument	and
counterargument.	Certainly	not	by	accepting	without	dissent.
Perhaps	Barbarika	is	laughing	at	all	of	us.	Let	us	celebrate	that	laughter.
*****

SUGGESTED	READING
1.		Sarva	Daman	Singh.	Polyandry	in	Ancient	India.	Motilal	Banarsidass	New
Delhi,	1988
2.		John	Dowson.		Classical	History	of	Hindu	Myth	and	Religion.	Munshiram
Manoharlal	Publishers,	New	Delhi,	2000
3.		A.L.	Ahuja.	Women	in	Indian	Mythology.	Rupa	&	Co.	New	Delhi,	2011
4.		Ram	Sharan	Sharma.	Aspects	of	Political	Ideas	and	Institutions	in	Ancient
India.	Motilal	Banarsidass,	New	Delhi,	2012
5.		Vettam	Mani.	Puranic	Encyclopedia.	Motilal	Banarsidass,	New	Delhi	2010;
Malayalam	ed:	DC	Books,	Kottayam	2013	[Ed:	Perhaps	the	most
comprehensive	book	on	various	Puranic	characters;	written	as	short	notes,
alphabetically	arranged.	A	good	reference	source	for	anyone	interested	in
Hindu	mythology.]
6.		The	Mahabharata	of	Krishna	Dwaipayana	Vyasa	–	Translated	from	original
Sanskrit	to	English	by	Kisari	Mohan	Ganguly,	(1883-1896),	ebook	converted
by	sacred-books.com
7.		18	Puranas,	unabridged	version,	DC	books,	2014	[a	collection	of	18
Puranas	in	Malayalam,	published	by	DC	books,	Kottayam]
*****

SELECT	GLOSSARY
Aarti	–	Worship	with	lamps
Acharya	–	Guru,	teacher
Achuyuta	–	Another	name	for	Krishna
Aghoris	–	Ascetic	worshippers	of	Shiva	who	do	not	believe	in	caste	or	the	taboos	of	Hinduism;	known	for
extreme	and	even	outlandish	penance
Ajaya	–	Unconquerable
Andha	–	Blind
Anga	–	Ancient	Indian	kingdom;	present-day	Eastern	Bihar	and	parts	of	Bengal
Angavasthra	–	Shawl	worn	by	nobles
Ashwini	Twins	–	Gods	of	sunrise	and	sunset
Astra	–	Arrow/shaft;	described	by	the	epics	as	having	divine	powers
Asura	 –	 Hindu	 mythology	 portrays	 Asuras	 as	 demons	 of	 darkness	 –	 the	 antithesis	 to	 Devas,	 the	 Gods;
here,	they	are	one	among	many	tribes
Atharva	–	The	fourth	Veda,	which	speaks	of	magic,	spells,	etc.
Atma	–	Soul
Avarna	 –	 A	 person	 who	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the	 first	 three	 castes;	 literally	 one	 without	 colour	 (varna);
opposite	of	savarna	(person	with	a	good	colour)
Ayurveda	–	Ancient	Indian	system	of	medicine
Bindi	–	Red	dot	worn	on	the	forehead	by	Hindu	women
Brahmacharya	 –	 Self-imposed	 vow	 of	 celibacy;	 a	 period	 of	 life	 as	 a	 student	 when	 a	 man	 observes
brahmacharya;	to	seek	or	follow	God
Brahman	–	The	Supreme	Power	responsible	for	Creation	and	the	Universe
Brahmin	–	The	highest	Hindu	caste	and	varna	–	Priests	and	scholars;	Hindu	society	was	divided	into	four
varnas	 (refer	 Varna	 for	 details),	 and	 further	 sub-divided	 into	 jatis	 (castes);	 these	 varied	 from	 region	 to
region	(eg.	a	Brahmin	from	Kashmir	in	the	north	and	one	from	Andhra	in	the	south,	belonged	to	the	same
varna	but	did	not	intermarry	as	they	belonged	to	different	castes)
Chaitra	–	Indian	calendar	month	when	spring	begins
Chandagyo	–	One	of	the	most	important	of	the	Upanishads	
Chandalas	–	One	of	the	lowest	of	the	Untouchable	castes;	keepers	of	graveyards;	those	who	carried	the
dead
Chaturvarnas	–	The	four	varnas	(refer	Varna	for	details)
Chenda	 –	 A	 south	 Indian	 drum	 beaten	 with	 a	 curved	 stick;	 known	 even	 today	 as	 the	 Asura	 Vadhya	 or
‘musical	 instrument	 of	 the	 Asuras’	 and	 used	 during	 festivals	 in	 Kerala	 and	 parts	 of	 south	 Karnataka	 and
Tamil	Nadu
Chera	–	Ancient	kingdom	in	south	India,	with	Muzaris	as	its	capital
Chettis	–	Merchant	caste	of	south	India	(corruption	of	the	term	shresti)	
Crore	–	One	hundred	lakhs;	ten	million
Dakshinajanapada	–	Land	south	of	the	Vindhyas;	south	India
Darshan	 –	 Literally	 ‘view’;	 it	 was	 customary	 for	 Indian	 monarchs	 to	 appear	 at	 a	 balcony	 and	 hear
petitions	from	their	subjects
Dasa	–	Servant	or	slave
Dasi	–	Female	servant/slave
Devi	–	a	polite	way	to	address	a	woman.	Also	means	goddess.	‘Bhavathi’	was	a	later	day	usage.
Dhanurveda	–	Science	of	arms	and	weapon-making
Dharma	 –	 Rough	 translation:	 duty,	 righteousness	 etc;	 but	dharma	encompasses	 more	 –	 it	 is	 the	 code	 of

life;	antonym:	adharma	
Dharmaveera	–	Warrior	or	hero	of	dharma	
Dharmayudha	–	Ancient	code	of	battle
Dhoti	–	Traditional	lower	garment	for	men,	made	from	an	unstitched	length	of	cloth;	also	worn	in	different
styles	by	lower-class	women	in	ancient	India
Gandhara	–	Present-day	Kandahar	in	Afghanistan
Gandharvas	 –	 Singers	 in	 the	 courts	 of	 the	 Gods;	 considered	 to	 be	 supernatural	 beings	 pining	 for	 love;
messengers	between	the	Gods	and	men;	here,	they	are	simply	another	aboriginal	tribe
Ganga	–	Ganges
Gangotri	–	Glacier	from	where	the	Ganga	originates
Gayatri	–	Sacred	Hindu	mantra	from	the	Rig	Veda;	 when	 the	 caste	 system	 was	 at	 its	 zenith,	 many	 texts
forbade	 Shudras	 from	 even	 listening	 to	 it;	 some	 texts	 advocated	 pouring	 molten	 lead	 into	 the	 ears	 of
Shudras	who	heard	the	Gayatri	even	accidently	–	though	it	is	doubtful	if	it	was	really	practised
Ghat	–	A	broad	flight	of	steps	leading	down	to	a	river
Gobar	–	Cow	dung
Har	Har	Mahadev	–	Hail	Shiva,	the	Greatest	God
Hari	–	Another	name	for	Lord	Vishnu
Hastinapura	–	City	of	Elephants,	capital	of	the	Kuru	kingdom
Indra	 –	 King	 of	 the	 Gods;	 used	 here	 as	 a	 generic	 name	 of	 the	 tribe	 who	 are	 the	 nominal	 rulers	 of	 the
Devas;	Indra,	their	last	King,	lives	in	penury;	he	is	also	the	biological	father	of	Arjuna
Indraprastha	–	Ancient	capital	of	the	Pandavas;	present-day	New	Delhi
Jambu	Dweepa	–	Ancient	Indian	name	for	Asia
Jaya	–	Victory
Kala	 –	 Time;	 also	 God	 of	 Time	 and	 Death,	 commonly	 known	 as	 Yama	 (derived	 from	 the	 unit	 for
measuring	time	–	yamam)	
Kalaripayattu	–	Traditional	martial	art	form	of	Kerala
Kalinga	–	Present-day	Odisha	(roughly)
Kaliya	 Mardana	 –	 Kaliya:	 a	 poisonous	 snake	 (naga),	 in	 the	 original	 Mahabharata;	 Mardana:
punishment,	 suppression	 etc.	 Kaliya	 Mardana	 is	 one	 telling	 of	 the	 legend	 of	 Lord	 Krishna	 punishing	 the
naga	for	his	evil	deeds.
Kamarupa	–	Ancient	name	for	present-day	Assam
Karma	–	Action	or	deed
Kashi	–	Another	name	for	the	holy	city	of	Varanasi	or	Benaras
Kauravas	–	Scions	of	the	Kuru	dynasty
Khandiva	–	Present-day	Delhi
King ara	–	Servants;	soldier-slaves
Kinnaras	 –	 In	 Hindu	 mythology,	 these	 are	 celestial	 musicians,	 half-horse	 and	 half-human;	 ere,	 they	 are
treated	as	just	another	tribe
Kirata	–	A	wild	tribe
Kshatriyas	–	The	warrior	caste;	often	kings	and	rulers
Kuravan,	 Malayans,	 Vannans,	 Velans	 –	 Tribes	 from	 the	 Western	 Ghats	 (Sahyas)	 of	 India.	 They	 were
Priests	 before	 the	 Brahmins	 became	 prominent;	 even	 today,	 many	 rituals	 in	 the	 Malabar	 region	 are
conducted	by	these	people
Kurta	–	Indian	shirt
Lakh	–	One	hundred	thousand
Lathi	–	Baton,	usually	used	by	the	police	to	control	crowds
Leela	–	Divine	play	or	drama
Lord	Vishwanatha	–	Lord	of	the	Universe;	another	name	for	Shiva
Ma	–	Mother
Madhava	–	Another	name	for	Krishna

Mahadeva	–	Great	God;	another	name	for	Shiva
Maheswara	–	Great	God;	another	name	for	Shiva
Mahout	–	Elephant	handler
Mata	–	Mother
Maya	–	Illusion
Mela	–	Gathering
Milavu,	Timila,	Maddallam	&	Mrudang am	–	Percussion	instruments
Mlecha	 –	 Barbaric/uncivilized	 people;	 term	 usually	 used	 for	 foreigners	 like	 the	 Greeks	 or	 Chinese,	 in
ancient	India
Moksha	–	Salvation;	nirvana	in	Buddhism
Muzaris	–	Ancient	port	city	on	the	South-Western	coast	of	India,	50	kms	north	of	modern-day	Cochin,	in
Kerala
Nag as	 –	 An	 ancient	 tribe;	 literally	 ‘serpents’;	 here	 they	 represent	 a	 warring	 tribe	 that	 rises	 against	 caste
oppression
Namaskara	–	‘I	bow	to	the	goodness	in	thee’	–	a	form	of	greeting;	also	Namaste	
Nishada	–	A	hunter	tribe
Onam	 –	 The	 only	 Indian	 festival	 celebrated	 in	 honour	 of	 an	 Asura	 King	 –	 Mahabali;	 State	 festival	 of
Kerala;	 people	 still	 believe	 the	 reign	 of	 this	 Asura	 King	 (cheated	 of	 his	 kingdom	 by	 Lord	 Vishnu	 in	 his
Vamana	avatar),	is	the	ideal,	and	every	human	being	was	considered	equal
Pallavas	–	Ancient	south-Indian	kingdom;	its	capital	was	Kanchipuram/Kanchi
Pallu	–	The	loose	end	of	a	sari	draped	over	the	head	or	over	one	shoulder
Panchayat	–	Indian	village	Council,	usually	with	5	members
Pandavas	–	Sons	of	Pandu
Pandya	–	Ancient	kingdom	in	south	India	with	Madurai	as	its	capital
Parameswara	–	Literally	‘Supreme	God’;	another	name	for	Shiva,	one	of	the	Trinity	of	Hindu	Gods	(the
other	two	being	Brahma	and	Vishnu)
Parashuramakshetra	 –	 Place	 of	 Parashurama	 –	 the	 ancient	 kingdom	 of	 Cheras	 (Gokarna	 to
Kanyakumari,	 between	 the	 Sahyas	 and	 the	 sea).	 It	 is	 believed	 Parashurama	 reclaimed	 this	 land	 from	 the
sea	and	gifted	it	to	the	Brahmins
Pariah	–	Lowest	caste,	and	the	most	discriminated	against
Parvati	–	Lord	Shiva’s	consort
Pasupathi	–	Literally	‘Lord	of	the	Beasts’;	usually	applied	to	Shiva
Patala	–	Netherworld;	here,	capital	of	the	Asuras	in	exile
Poorna	–	River	in	Kerala;	also	known	as	Periyar
Prabhasa	–	A	city	in	present-day	Gujarat
Prabhu	–	Sir,	an	honorific;	also	used	to	mean	a	rich	man
Puja	–	Religious	ritual
Purendra	–	Indra,	King	of	the	Gods;	also	known	as	‘destroyer	of	cities’	
Rag as	–	Scales	in	Indian	classical	music
Raja	Dharma	–	Code	of	ethics	for	rulers
Rajasuya	 –	 Sacrifice	 performed	 by	 Indian	 Kings	 in	 ancient	 times,	 who	 considered	 themselves	 powerful
enough	to	be	Emperors
Rakshasa	–	Mythological	evil	being
Sabha	–	Court	or	assembly
Sahya	–	Mountains	running	parallel	to	the	Western	seaboard	of	India
Samhita	–	A	collection	of	holy	hymns/science/knowledge
Sanathana	–	Eternal;	Hinduism	is	often	considered	to	be	an	eternal	religion	without	beginning	or	end
Sarpasatra	 –	 a	 sacrifice	 of	 serpents.	 This	 perhaps	 refers	 to	 an	 ancient	 pogrom	 when	 the	 Naga	 race	 was
eliminated
Sari	–	Traditional	attire	of	Indian	women,	made	from	-six	yards	of	unstitched	cloth

Sarpanch	–	Village	Chief/Head	of	the	Panchayat
Sarswati	–	A	mighty	river	which	once	flowed	between	the	Indus	and	Ganges,	which	has	now	vanished
Shastras	–	Rules,	codes,	tradition,	science,	specialised	knowledge
Shiva	 –	 The	 Destroyer,	 one	 of	 the	 Hindu	 Trinity	 of	 Gods	 who	 at	 the	 end	 of	 each	 eon,	 destroys	 the
Universe,	after	which	Brahma	the	Creator,	re-creates	it
Shivaling a	–	Phallic	symbol	of	Lord	Shiva
Shravan	–	Fifth	month	of	the	Hindu	calendar;	considered	to	be	a	holy	month
Shri	–	Honorific	for	gentlemen;	equivalent	to	Mister;	also	spelt	Sri,	Shree	etc.
Shudra	 –	 Lowest	 of	 the	 four	 Varnas,	 the	 other	 three	 being	 (in	 order	 of	 precedence):	 Brahmana,
Khshatriya,	and	Vaishya
Sindhu	–	River	Indus;	also	the	land	around	it;	here,	Indus	is	ruled	by	Jayadratha,	Duryodhana’s	brotherin-law
Smritis	–	‘That	which	is	remembered’;	Hindu	laws	written	by	different	sages;	including	Manu	Smriti,	the
code	for	society	in	ancient	India
Soma	–	Important	ritual	drink	during	Vedic	times;	also	the	moon
Somanatha	–	Celebrated	temple	of	Lord	Shiva	–	Lord	of	Somas	(life	energy)
Stithapranja	 –	 A	 rough	 translation	 is	 ‘one	 who	 maintains	 equanimity	 in	 joy	 and	 sorrow’;	 however,	 the
word	has	a	deeper	meaning	and	is	said	to	encapsulate	the	essence	of	the	Gita
Suta	 –	 Charioteer	 caste;	 also	 famous	 as	 storytellers.	 Kings	 often	 used	 them	 to	 propagate	 tales	 of	 their
valour	in	battle
Swami	–	Sir,	an	honorific	used	to	address	a	social	superior
Swayamvara	 –	 Ancient	 Indian	 custom	 wherein	 a	 girl	 chose	 her	 groom	 from	 a	 gathering	 of	 suitors,
sometimes	through	competition
Tapsya	–	Penance
Timila	–	Percussion	instrument	of	Asura	origin
Trimurti	–	Trinity	of	Gods:	Brahma	the	Creator,	Vishnu	the	Preserver,	and	Shiva	the	Destroyer
Tulsi	–	Holy	Basil;	a	plant	revered	in	Hinduism,	especially	in	the	worship	of	Krishna	or	Vishnu
Upanishads	 –	 Collection	 of	 holy	 books;	 along	 with	 the	 commentaries	 (called	Brahmanas),	 forming	 the
basis	of	Indian	philosophical	thought
Urumi	–	Sinuous,	belt-like	sword	used	in	Kalaripayattu,	an	ancient	martial	art	form	of	south	India
Uttariya	–	Shawl,	worn	as	a	shoulder	cloth
Vaikunta	–	Abode	of	Lord	Vishnu	and	the	heaven	reserved	for	his	devotees
Vaishya	–	Merchant	caste
Vana	–	Grove	or	forest
Vanara	–	Monkey;	here	they	are	a	tribe	of	mixed	descent,	living	in	southern	India
Vang a	–	Present-day	Bengal,	including	Bangladesh
Varna	–	Literally	‘colour’;	also	meaning	‘social	groups’;	Hindu	society	was	divided	into	4 	basic	varnas:
Brahmana	 or	 Brahmins	 (Priests	 and	 teachers)	 at	 the	 top;	 Kshatriyas	 or	 warriors	 second;	 Vaishya	 or
merchants	 third;	 and	 Shudras	 (farmers,	 craftsmen,	 foot	 soldiers,	 petty	 traders,	 dancers,	 musicians,	 etc)	 at
the	bottom	of	the	caste	hierarchy;	below	these	were	the	poorest	of	the	poor,	the	Untouchables
Varnashrama	–	In	the	ancient	Hindu	way	of	life,	the	ideal	lifespan	of	an	individual	maintaining	dharma,
was	divided	into	4 	stages:	student,	householder,	retiree;	and	renunciation
Vatapi	–	Present-day	Badami,	a	city	in	north-central	Karnataka
Vayu	–	God	of	Winds
Vedas	–	The	four	holy	books	(Rig,	Yajur,	Sama	and	Atharva)	of	the	Hindus;	considered	to	possess	all	the
wisdom	of	the	world
Vijaya	–	Victory
Vindhyas	–	Mountain	ranges	which	separate	northern	and	southern	India
Vishnu	–	The	Preserver,	second	of	the	Hindu	Trinity	of	Gods,	who	protects	the	rhythm	of	the	Universe
Yadava	–	Tribe	of	cowherds

Yajna	–	Ritual	sacrifice	of	herbal	preparations	into	the	fire	with	Vedic	mantras	
Yaksha	 –	 Supernatural	 beings,	 sometimes	 the	 patron	 Gods	 of	 trees	 and	 forests	 in	 Hindu	 mythology,
believed	 to	 guard	 hidden	 treasures.	 The	 female	 of	 the	 species	 (Yakshi),	 are	 notorious	 for	 charming
unsuspecting	travellers	into	the	forest	and	drinking	their	blood	or	eating	them;	here,	they	are	simply	a	tribe
Yavana	Desa	–	Greece
Yavana	–	Greek

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
My	 thanks	 go	 to	 my	 readers,	 without	 whose	 support,	 encouragement	 and
criticism	of	my	novels,	Asura,	Tale	of	the	Vanquished	and	the	first	book	of	the
Ajaya	–	epic	of	the	Kaurava	clan,	Roll	of	the	dice,	I	would	not	have	dared	to
write	the	second	part	of	Ajaya	–	Rise	of	Kali	–	within	a	year.	I	thank	each	of	my
readers	who	were	kind	enough	to	write	to	me	with	their	feedback.	I	also	thank
the	 readers	 of	 the	 translated	 versions	 of	 Asura	 in	 Hindi,	 Tamil,	 Telugu,
Marathi,	Kannada,	Malayalam	and	Gujarati	languages.
To	Swarup	Nanda,	for	being	a	friend	and	guide	for	Asura	and	Ajaya.
To	 my	 Editor,	 Chandralekha	 Maitra,	 for	 guiding	 me	 in	 making	 my	 writing
better	while	giving	me	enough	creative	freedom,	and	then	suffering	my	draft
manuscripts	with	patience.
To	 my	 Publisher,	 Leadstart	 Publishing,	 for	 showing	 confidence	 in	 me	 by
publishing	my	third	book,	Ajaya,	Rise	of	Kali.
My	sincere	gratitude	to	the	other	team	members:	Daniel,	Indur,	Preeti,	Iftikar,
Rajesh,	 Ramu,	 Salam	 and	 many	 others,	 who	 have	 worked	 with	 dedication	 to
make	my	previous	books	a	great	success	and	showing	the	same	enthusiasm	for
this	one.
To	my	father,	the	Late	L.	Neelakantan,	and	mother,	the	Late	D.	Chellamal,	for
introducing	me	to	the	world	of	mythology.
To	my	Aparna,	for	your	unstinting	support	in	my	endeavours	and	for	the	love	I
often	wonder	if	I	deserve.
To	 my	 daughter	 Ananya	 and	 son	 Abhinav,	 for	 keeping	 the	 storyteller	 in	 me
alive,	by	demanding	more	and	more	stories	every	night	and	being	the	kind	of
critics	any	author	dreads.
To	 my	 sister	 Chandrika	 and	 my	 brother-in-law	 Parameswaran,	 my	 brothers
Lokanathan,	 Rajendran	 and	 my	 sisters-in-law	 Meena	 and	 Radhika;	 also	 my
nephew	 Dileep,	 and	 nieces	 Rakhi	 and	 Deepa,	 as	 well	 as	 my	 extended	 family

members,	for	all	those	wonderful	days.
To	my	pet	Jacky,	the	blackie,	who	keeps	me	glued	to	my	laptop	by	barking	at
the	 slightest	 show	 of	 laziness	 and	 demanding	 I	 take	 him	 for	 a	 walk	 as
punishment	the	moment	I	lift	my	fingers	from	the	keyboard.
To	Santosh	Prabhu,	Sujith	Krishnan,	and	Rajesh	Rajan,	for	the	evenings	spent
together	discussing	Indian	philosophy	and	the	Mahabharata,	years	ago,	which
sowed	the	seeds	of	this	novel	in	me.
To	 Premjeet,	 for	 his	 maverick	 ideas,	 to	 Ashish	 Bhatnagar	 for	 reading	 and
criticising	my	first	drafts.	To	Essarpee	(S	R	Prashanth)	and	D	Sivaprasad,	for
their	support	in	my	online	campaigns.
To	my	country	and	my	people,	for	tolerating	different	points	of	view	and	for
the	richness	of	our	history	and	mythology.
To	 the	 rich	 traditions	 of	 my	 hometown,	 Thripoonithura,	 and	 the	 history	 of
Cochin.
To	 Vedavyasa,	 the	 patron	 of	 all	 Indian	 writers;	 the	 greatest	 writer	 to	 have
walked	this	earth.
To	the	masters	of	writing	in	all	our	Indian	languages,	with	sincere	apologies
for	daring	to	attempt	something	that	has	already	been	so	skillfully	essayed	by
you	over	the	centuries.
I	owe	much	to	all	of	you,	as	well	as	to	the	others	who	I	may	have	not	named
here.
*****

#	1	BESTSELLER

T

omorrow	is	my	funeral.	I	do	not	know	if	they	will	bury	me	like	a	mangy
dog	or	I	 will	have	 a	funeral	fit	for	an	Emperor	–	an	erstwhile	Emperor.
But	it	does	not	really	matter.	I	can	hear	the	scuffing	sounds	made	by	the	jackals.
They	are	busy	eating	my	friends	and	family.	Something	scurried	over	my	feet.
What	 was	 it?	 I	 haven’t	 the	 strength	 to	 raise	 my	 head.	 Bandicoots.	 Big,	 dark,
hairy	rats.	They	conquer	the	battlefields	after	foolish	men	have	finished	their
business	of	killing	each	other.	It	is	a	feast	day	for	them	today,	just	as	it	has	been
for	 the	 past	 eleven	 days.	 The	 stench	 is	 overpowering	 with	 the	 stink	 of
putrefying	flesh,	pus,	blood,	urine	and	death.	The	enemy’s	and	ours.	It	does	not
matter.	Nothing	matters	now.	I	will	pass	out	soon.	The	pain	is	excruciating.	His
fatal	arrow	struck	my	lower	abdomen.	But	I	am	not	afraid	of	death.	I	have	been
thinking	of	it	for	some	time	now.	Thousands	have	been	slain	over	the	last	few
days.
Somewhere	in	the	depths	of	the	sea,	my	brother	Kumbha	lies	dead,	half-eaten
by	sharks.	I	lit	my	son	Meghanada’s	funeral	pyre	yesterday.	Or	was	it	the	day
before?	 I’ve	 lost	 all	 sense	 of	 time.	 I	 have	 lost	 the	 sense	 of	 many	 things.	 A
lonely	 star	 is	 shimmering	 in	 the	 depths	 of	 the	 universe.	 Like	 the	 eye	 of	 God.
Very	 much	like	 the	third	eye	 of	 Shiva,	an	all-consuming,	all-destroying	third
eye.	My	beloved	Lanka	is	being	destroyed.	I	can	still	see	the	dying	embers	in
what	was	once	a	fine	city.	My	capital	Trikota	was	the	greatest	city	in	the	world.
That	 was	 before	 the	 monkey-man	 came	 and	 set	 it	 on	 fire.	 Trikota	 burned	 for
days.	Shops,	homes,	palaces,	men,	women,	and	babies,	everything	burned.	But
we	restored	 it.	Almost	every	 able	man	joined	in	rebuilding	Trikota.	Then	the
monkey-men	 came	 with	 their	 masters	 and	 destroyed	 everything	 again.
Hanuman	 did	 that	 to	 us.	 The	 monkey-man	 brought	 us	 death,	 destruction	 and
defeat.
I	do	not	want	to	dwell	on	that.	I	should	have	killed	him	when	my	son	captured
him.	Instead,	I	listened	to	my	younger	brother,	who	then	plotted	against	me.	But
treason	 and	 betrayal	 is	 nothing	 new	 to	 the	 Asuras.	 I	 was	 naïve.	 I	 foolishly
believed	 I	 would	 always	 be	 loved	 by	 my	 brothers	 and	 my	 people.	 I	 never

imagined	 I	 would	 be	 betrayed.	 I	 feel	 like	 laughing	 now.	 But	 it	 is	 not	 easy	 to
laugh	 when	 one’s	 guts	 lie	 spread	 around	 like	 a	 wreath.	 Sounds	 of	 joy	 float
down	to	me	from	my	city.	The	enemy	is	celebrating	their	victory.	The	monkeymen	will	be	busy	plundering	Trikota.	My	temples	will	be	looted;	the	granaries
torched,	 and	 schools	 and	 hospitals	 burnt.	 That	 is	 how	 victory	 parties	 are.	 We
have	 done	 the	 same	 and	 worse	 to	 many	 Deva	 villages,	 when	 the	 Goddess	 of
victory	 was	 my	 consort.	 Some	 ugly	 monkeys	 must	 have	 entered	 my	 harem.	 I
hope	my	Queen	has	the	sense	to	jump	from	a	cliff	before	anything	happens.	I
cannot	control	anything	now.	I	can	feel	the	hot	breath	of	death	on	my	face.
The	jackals	have	come.	Which	part	of	my	body	will	they	eat	first?	Perhaps	my
guts,	as	they	are	still	bleeding.	What	if	a	part	of	my	breastplate	chokes	a	jackal?
I	chuckle	at	the	thought.	A	jackal	sinks	his	teeth	into	my	cheek	and	rips	off	a
chunk	of	flesh.	That	is	it.	I’ve	lost	that	bet	too.	They	have	started	on	my	face.
Rats	are	nibbling	at	my	toes.	I,	Ravana,	have	come	a	long	way.	Now	I	do	not
have	 anything	 left	 to	 fight	 for,	 except	 this	 battle	 with	 the	 jackals.	 Tomorrow,
there	 will	 be	 a	 procession	 through	 the	 streets.	 They	 will	 raise	 my	 head	 on	 a
pole	and	parade	it	through	the	same	roads	that	saw	me	racing	by	in	my	royal
chariot.	My	people	will	throng	to	watch	the	spectacle	with	horror	and	perverse
pleasure.	I	know	my	people	well.	It	will	be	a	big	show.
I	do	not	understand	why	Rama	came	and	stood	over	me	when	I	fell.	He	stood
there	as	if	bestowing	his	blessings	upon	me.	He	said	to	his	brother	that	I	was
the	most	learned	man	in	the	world	and	a	great	King,	and	one	could	learn	the	art
of	governance	from	me.	I	almost	laughed	out	loud.	I	had	governed	so	well	that
my	 empire	 lay	 shattered	 all	 around	 me.	 I	 could	 smell	 the	 burning	 corpses	 of
my	soldiers.	I	could	feel	my	Meghanada’s	cold	and	lifeless	body	in	my	arms
even	 now.	 The	 acrid	 air	 of	 a	 smouldering	 Trikota	 smothered	 my	 senses.	 I
could	not	save	my	people	from	these	two	warriors	and	their	monkey-men.	And
he	was	saying	I	was	a	great	ruler?	I	could	appreciate	the	irony	of	it.	I	wanted	to
laugh	at	my	enemy;	laugh	at	the	foolish	men	who	trusted	me,	who	were	now
lying	 all	 around,	 headless,	 limbless	 and	 lifeless.	 I	 wanted	 to	 laugh	 at	 the
utopian	dreams	of	equality	for	all	men	on	which	I	had	built	an	empire.	It	was
laughable	 indeed.	 But	 laughing	 was	 no	 way	 for	 an	 Emperor	 to	 die.	 I	 have
worked	hard	and	fought	with	the	Gods	and	their	chosen	men.	I	doubt	if	heaven
has	a	place	for	people	who	die	of	laughter.
Then	just	as	suddenly	as	it	had	started,	the	rats	and	jackals	scurried	away.	A
shadow,	darker	than	the	dark	night,	fell	upon	me.	A	dark	head	with	curly	hair

blocked	 the	 lonely	 star	 from	 my	 view.	 Is	 it	 Kala,	 the	 God	 of	 Death,	 who	 has
come	to	take	me	away?	I	struggled	to	open	my	eyes	wider.	But	dried	blood	held
my	eyelids	together.	Is	it	one	of	Rama’s	lowly	servants	come	to	sever	my	head
and	take	it	back	as	a	trophy?	I	want	to	look	him	in	the	face.	I	want	to	look	into
his	 eyes,	 unwavering	 and	 unflinching	 in	 my	 last	 moments.	 Something	 about
that	head	 and	curly	 hair	reminded	 me	of	my	past.	 Do	I	know	him?	 He	 leaned
down	to	look	at	my	face.
Ah!	It	is	Bhadra.	My	friend,	perhaps	the	only	friend	left,	but	I	do	not	know	if	I
can	call	him	my	friend.	He	was	my	servant,	a	foot	soldier	to	start	with.	Then	he
got	 lost	 somewhere	 along	 the	 way.	 He	 strolled	 in	 and	 out	 of	 my	 life,	 was
sometimes	missing	for	years	together.	Bhadra	had	access	to	my	private	camp
when	I	was	the	head	of	a	troop	that	resembled	a	wayside	gang	of	robbers	rather
than	 a	 revolutionary	 army.	 Then,	 he	 had	 had	 access	 to	 my	 private	 chambers
when	I	was	the	King	of	a	small	island.	Finally,	he	had	access	to	my	bedroom
when	I	was	ruling	India.	More	than	that,	Bhadra	had	access	to	the	dark	corners
of	my	mind,	a	part	that	I	hid	from	my	brothers,	my	wife,	my	lover,	my	people,
and	even	from	myself.
What	is	Bhadra	doing	here?	But	why	am	I	surprised?	This	is	just	the	place	for
people	 like	 him,	 who	 move	 about	 in	 the	 shadows.	 I	 can	 hear	 him	 sobbing.
Bhadra	getting	emotional?	He	was	never	angry,	sad	or	happy.	He	acted	as	if	he
was	 very	 emotional	 now.	 But	 I	 knew	 he	 had	 no	 emotions.	 And	 Bhadra	 was
aware	I	knew.	Bhadra,	carry	me	away	from	here.	Take	me	away	to...	My	strength
fails	me.	I	do	not	know	whether	the	words	were	spoken	or	died	a	silent	death
somewhere	 in	 my	 throat.	 Bhadra	 shakes	 his	 head.	 I	 am	 cold,	 extremely	 cold.
My	 life	 is	 ebbing	 out	 of	 me.	 Then	 Bhadra	 hugs	 my	 head	 to	 his	 bosom.	 I	 can
smell	 his	 sweat.	 Pain	 shoots	 through	 me	 from	 every	 angle	 and	 spreads	 its
poisonous	 tentacles	 into	 my	 veins.	 I	 groan.	 Bhadra	 lays	 me	 back	 on	 the	 wet
earth	–	wet	from	my	blood,	the	blood	of	my	people,	the	blood	of	my	dreams,
and	the	blood	of	my	life.	It	is	over.	A	sense	of	sadness	and	emptiness	descends
upon	me.
“I	will	complete	your	work,	Your	Highness.	Go	in	peace.	I	will	do	it	for	our
race.	My	methods	may	be	different,	even	ignoble,	compared	to	yours.	I	too	was
once	a	warrior	but	I	have	grown	old.	Arms	frighten	me	now.	I	am	terrified	of
war.	 I	 cannot	 even	 hurt	 a	 child.	 Nevertheless,	 my	 methods	 are	 deadly.	 I	 will
avenge	you,	me,	and	our	blighted	race.	Rama	will	not	go	free	for	what	he	has
done	to	us.	Believe	me	and	go	in	peace.”

I	did	not	hear	most	of	what	Bhadra	said.	Strangely	however,	I	was	soothed	and
slipped	away	from	this	foul-smelling	Asura	and	drifted	back	to	my	childhood.
A	 thousand	 images	 rushed	 to	 me.	 My	 early	 struggles,	 the	 pangs	 of	 love	 and
abandonment,	separation,	battles	and	wars,	music	and	art,	they	flashed	through
my	mind	in	no	particular	order,	making	no	sense.	Meaningless,	like	life	itself.
I	sensed	Bhadra	bowing	down	to	touch	my	feet,	then	walking	away.	I	wanted
to	call	him	back	and	take	me	to	a	doctor	who	would	put	my	intestines	back,	fit
my	dangling	left	eye	back	into	its	socket	and	somehow	blow	life	into	my	body.
I	wanted	to	withdraw	to	the	Sahyas	forests	in	the	mainland	and	start	a	guerilla
war,	as	Mahabali	had	done	years	ago.	I	wanted	to	start	again.	I	wanted	to	make
the	same	mistakes,	love	the	same	people,	fight	the	same	enemies,	befriend	the
same	friends,	marry	the	same	wives	and	sire	the	same	sons.	I	wanted	to	live	the
same	life	again.	I	did	not	want	the	seat	Rama	has	reserved	for	me	in	his	heaven.
I	only	wanted	this	beautiful	earth.
I	knew	it	was	not	going	to	happen.	I	was	sixty,	not	sixteen.	If	I	lived,	I	would
be	a	one-eyed,	dirty,	old	beggar	in	some	wayside	temple,	wearing	stinking	and
tattered	 clothes	 –	 a	 long	 way	 from	 what	 I	 once	 was.	 I	 wanted	 to	 die	 now.	 I
wanted	 this	 to	 end.	 I	 wanted	 to	 go	 away.	 Let	 the	 burning	 cities	 take	 care	 of
themselves.	Let	the	Asuras	fight	their	own	wars	and	be	damned	along	with	the
Devas.	 I	 only	 wanted	 to	 return	 to	 my	 childhood	 and	 start	 over	 again,	 every
single	damn	thing,	again	and	again,	and	again…
*****

