ASURA
TALE	OF	THE	VANQUISHED
The	Story	of	Ravana	and	His	People

ANAND	NEELAKANTAN

ISBN	978-93-81576-05-2
©	Story:	Anand	Neelakantan,	2012
©	Illustrations:	Leadstart	Publishing,	2012
Illustrations
Amplecreation	Studio
Cover	Design			 Mishta	Roy	Layouts
Layouts
Ajay	Shah
Printing
Repro	India	Ltd
First	published	in	India	2012	by
PLATINUM	PRESS
An	imprint	of
LEADSTART	PUBLISHING	PVT	LTD
Trade	Centre,	Level	1,	Bandra	Kurla	Complex
Bandra	(E),	Mumbai	400	051,	INDIA
T	+	91	22	40700804	F	+91	22	40700800
E	info@leadstartcorp.com	W	www.leadstartcorp.com
US	Office
Axis	Corp,	7845	E	Oakbrook	Circle,	Madison,	WI	53717,	USA
All	rights	reserved	worldwide
No	 part	 of	 this	 publication	 may	 be	 reproduced,	 stored	 in	 or	 introduced	 into	 a
retrieval	 system,	 or	 transmitted,	 in	 any	 form,	 or	 by	 any	 means	 (electronic,
mechanical,	 photocopying,	 recording	 or	 otherwise),	 without	 the	 prior
permission	 of	 the	 Publisher.	 Any	 person	 who	 commits	 an	 unauthorised	 act	 in
relation	 to	 this	 publication	 can	 be	 liable	 to	 criminal	 prosecution	 and	 civil
claims	for	damages.
Disclaimer
This	is	a	work	of	pure	fiction.	All	the	characters	depicted	are	fictitious	and	any
resemblance	to	real	persons	living	or	dead,	is	purely	coincidental.	The	author
has	 used	 iconic	 names,	 dates,	 and	 events	 to	 aid	 story-telling.	 There	 is	 no
intention	to	imply	anything	else.	The	content	of	this	book	is	the	sole	expression
and	 opinion	 of	 its	 author	 and	 a	 work	 of	 his	 imagination	 and	 does	 not	 claim
scriptural	authenticity.	This	work	does	not	represent	the	views	of	the	Publisher,
nor	 endorses	 them	 in	 any	 way.	 The	 Publisher	 makes	 no	 representations	 or
warranties	as	to	the	completeness	or	accuracy	of	the	information	used	in	this
work.	Readers	are	requested	to	bear	in	mind	that	this	work	is	fiction	and	does
not	purport	to	any	religious	or	spiritual	instruction	or	advocacy.

TO	MY	PARENTS,

	LATE	SHRI	nt>L.	NEELAKANTAN	AND
CHELLAMMAL	NEELAKANTAN,

THE

WHO	OPENED	THE	MAGICAL	WORLD

	

	

OF INDIAN MYTHOLOGY	TO	ME.

About	The	Author
I	was	born	in	a	quaint	little	village	called	Thripoonithura,	on	the	outskirts
of	 Cochin,	 Kerala.	 Located	 east	 of	 mainland	 Ernakulam,	 across	 Vembanad
Lake,	 this	 village	 had	 the	 distinction	 of	 being	 the	 seat	 of	 the	 Cochin	 royal
family.	However,	it	was	more	famous	for	its	hundred-odd	temples;	the	various
classical	 artists	 it	 produced	 and	 its	 music	 school.	 I	 remember	 many	 evenings
spent	listening	to	the	faint	rhythm	of	Chendas	from	the	temples	and	the	notes	of
the	 flute	escaping	over	 the	rugged	walls	of	the	school	of	music.	Gulf	money
and	 the	 rapidly	 expanding	 city	 of	 Cochin	 have,	 however,	 wiped	 away	 all
remaining	vestiges	of	that	old	world	charm.	The	village	has	evolved	into	the
usual,	unremarkable,	suburban	hell	hole,	clones	of	which	dot	India.
Growing	up	in	a	village	with	more	temples	than	was	necessary,	it	was	no
wonder	 that	 the	 Ramayana	 fascinated	 me.	 Ironically,	 I	 was	 drawn	 to	 the	 antihero	of	the	epic	–	Ravana,	and	to	his	people,	the	Asuras.	I	wondered	about	their
magical	 world.	 But	 my	 fascination	 remained	 dormant	 for	 many	 years,
emerging	 only	 briefly	 to	 taunt	 and	 irritate	 my	 pious	 aunts	 during	 family
gatherings.	 Life	 went	 on.	 .	 .	 I	 became	 an	 engineer;	 joined	 the	 Indian	 Oil
Corporation;	 moved	 to	 Bangalore;	 married	 Aparna	 and	 welcomed	 my
daughter	Ananya,	and	my	son,	Abhinav.
But	 the	 Asura	 Emperor	 would	 not	 leave	 me	 alone.	 For	 six	 years	 he
haunted	my	dreams,	walked	with	me,	and	urged	me	to	write	his	version	of	the
story.	He	was	not	the	only	one	who	wanted	his	version	of	the	story	to	be	told.
One	by	one,	irrelevant	and	minor	characters	of	the	Ramayana	kept	coming	up
with	 their	 own	 versions.	 Bhadra,	 who	 was	 one	 of	 the	 many	 common	 Asuras
who	were	inspired,	led	and	betrayed	by	Ravana,	also	had	a	remarkable	story	to
tell,	 different	 from	 that	 of	 his	 king.	 And	 both	 their	 stories	 are	 different	 from
the	Ramayana	that	has	been	told	in	a	thousand	different	ways	across	Asia	over
the	 last	 three	 millennia.	 This	 is	 then	 Asurayana,	 the	 story	 of	 the	 Asuras,	 the
story	of	the	vanquished.
Anand	Neelakantan	can	be	reached	at:	mail@asura.co.in

Dasamukha
Why	is	Ravana	portrayed	as	ten-faced?
While	the	ten-headed,	twenty-armed	figure	of	Ravana	as	the	supreme	antihero,	 is	 familiar	 to	 every	 Indian	 and	 scholars	 of	 Indian	 mythology,	 few	 really
know	 why	 he	 is	 portrayed	 in	 this	 manner.	 Traditional	 Indian	 wisdom	 places
importance	on	the	control	of	one’s	emotions	and	projects	the	intellect	alone,	as
the	being	supreme.	The	great	King	Mahabali,	advises	Ravana	to	shun	the	other
nine	 base	 emotions	 of	 anger;	

pride;	 olditalic0552">jealousy;
happiness;	 sadness;	 fear;	 selfishness;	 passion	 and
ambition.	Intellect	alone	is	to	be	revered.	Indian	spiritual
gurus	 have	 always	 stressed	 the	 need	 to	 overcome	 the
Self’	 and	 have	 considered	 these	 emotions	 detrimental	 to
the	elevation	of	the	soul.
But,	 in	 his	 response	 to	 Mahabali,	 Ravana	 justifies	 and	 exults	 in	 the
possession	of	all	these	ten	facets,	as	they	make	him	a	complete	man.	Mythology
thus	 portrays	 Ravana	 as	 Dasamukha,	 or	 the	 ten-faced	 one,	 while	 his	 twenty
hands	 denote	 prowess	 and	 power.	 Ravana	 sees	 himself	 as	 the	 epitome	 of	 a
complete	human	being;	without	any	pretense	to	holiness	or	restricted	by	social
and	religious	norms.	He	is	as	good	or	as	bad	as	any	human	being,	and	as	nature
intended	man	to	be.	Society	is	unable	to	curb	his	other	nine	faces,	as	it	does	in
the	 figure	 of	 Rama.	 So	 Rama	 may	 be	 seen	 as	 God,	 but	 Ravana	 is	 the	 more
complete	man.	Our	epics	have	used	the	ten	heads	of	Ravana	to	symbolize	a	man
without	control	over	his	passions	–	eager	to	embrace	and	taste	life	–	all	of	it.

	
Ancient	India	at	the	peak	of
Ravana’s	Asura	Empire

Content

	
	
1	The	end
2	The	seed
3	Captives
4	Guru
5	Dasamukha,	the	ten-faced
6	Devil's	raid
7	Lore	of	the	losers
8	Maharaja
9	Maricha,	the	beloved
10	The	pearl	island	beckons
11	Traitor
12	The	wait
13	Lanka's	welcome
14	Betrayed
15	Poisonous	brews
16	The	pirate's	seige
17	The	silver-tongued
18	Brother's	brother
19	Pirate	troubles
20	Wedding	bells

21	Happy	family
22	Revolutionaries
23	Revolution	comes	home
24	Death	of	a	revolutionary
25	A	little	worm
26	The	untouchable	king
27	Love,	at	last!
28	An	asura	princess
29	Let	her	live
30	Lanka	lost
31	Den	of	death
32	Patriot
33	Son	of	darkness
34	Riot
35	The	duel
36	A	country	thanks	its	hero
37	A	daughter's	marriage
38	The	time	has	come
39	Return	of	the	Asura	Princess
40	Adieu	maricha
41	The	police	station
42	Messenger	of	death
43	Let	my	city	burn
44	Messenger	of	peace
45	Looming	war
46	For	my	people
47	War	without	ethics
48	Sons	are	sons
49	Death	visits	again
50	For	whose	sake?
51	A	hero	returns
52	A	prime	minister's	mission
53	Violation

54	End	of	an	idealist
55	Kumbhakarna's	attack
56	While	they	pray
57	Funeral	of	martyrs
58	Did	i	fail	as	king?
59	I	wish	you	death
60	End	of	a	dream
61	Victors	and	their	ways
62	Life	sprouts	again
63	Childish	dreams
64	Sword	of	dharma
65	The	beginning
Glossary
Acknowledgements

1	The	end
Ravana
Tomorrow	is	my	funeral.	I	do	not	know	if	they	will	bury	me	like	a	mangy
dog	or	whether	I	will	get	a	funeral	fit	for	an	Emperor	–	an	erstwhile	Emperor.
But	it	does	not	really	matter.	I	can	hear	the	scuffing	sounds	made	by	the	jackals.
They	are	busy	eating	my	friends	and	family.	Something	scurried	over	my	feet.
What	was	that?	I
I	 am	 not	 afraid	 of	 death.	 I	 have	 been	 thinking	 of	 it	 for	 some	 time	 now.
Thousands	have	been	slain	over	the	last	few	days.	Somewhere	in	the	depths	of
the	 sea,	 my	 brother	 Kumbha	 lies	 dead,	 half-eaten	 by	 sharks.	 I	 lit	 my	 son
Meghanada’s	 funeral	 pyre	 yesterday.	 Or	 was	 it	 the	 day	 before?	 I’ve	 lost	 all
sense	of	time.	I	have	lost	the	sense	of	many	things.
A	lonely	star	is	simmering	in	the	depths	of	the	universe.	Like	the	eye	of
God.	Very	much	like	the	third	eye	of	Shiva,	an	all-consuming,	all-destroying
third	eye.	My	beloved	Lanka	is	being	destroyed.	I	can	still	see	the	dying	embers
in	 what	 was	 once	 a	 fine	 city.	 My	 capital,	 Trikota,	 was	 the	 greatest	 city	 in	 the
world.	That	was	before	the	monkey-man	came	and	set	it	on	fire.	Trikota	burned
for	days.	Shops,	homes,	palaces,	men,	women,	and	babies,	everything	burned.
But	we	restored	it.	Almost	every	able	man	joined	in	rebuilding	Trikota.	Then
the	monkey-men	came	with	their	masters	and	destroyed	everything.	Hanuman
did	that	to	us.	The	monkey-man	brought	us	death,	destruction	and	defeat.
I	 don’t	 want	 to	 dwell	 on	 that.	 I	 should	 have	 killed	 him	 when	 my	 son
captured	 him.	 Instead,	 I	 listened	 to	 my	 younger	 brother,	 who	 plotted	 against
me.	 But	 treason	 and	 betrayal	 is	 nothing	 new	 to	 the	 Asuras.	 I	 was	 naïve.	 I
foolishly	believed	that	I	would	always	be	loved	by	my	brothers	and	my	people.
I	never	imagined	that	I	would	be	betrayed.	I	feel	like	laughing.	But	it’s	not	easy
to	laugh	when	one’s	guts	lie	spread	around	like	a	wreath.

Sounds	of	joy	float	down	to	me	from	my	city.	The	enemy	is	celebrating
his	victory.	The	monkey-men	will	be	busy	plundering	Trikota.	My	temples	will
be	 looted;	 the	 granaries	 torched	 and	 schools	 and	 hospitals	 burnt.	 That’s	 how
victory	parties	are.	We	have	done	that	and	worse	to	many	Deva	villages,	when
the	Goddess	of	victory	was	my	consort.	Some	ugly	monkeys	must	have	entered
my	harem.	I	hope	my	queen	has	the	sense	to	jump	from	a	cliff	before	anything
happens.	I	can’t	control	anything	now.	I	can	feel	the	hot	breath	of	death	on	my
face.	The	jackals	have	come.	Which	part	of	my	body	will	they	eat	first?	Perhaps
my	 guts,	 as	 they	 are	 still	 bleeding.	 What	 if	 a	 part	 of	 my	 breastplate	 chokes	 a
jackal?	I	chuckle	at	the	thought.	A	jackal	sinks	his	teeth	into	my	cheek	and	rips
off	a	chunk	of	flesh.	That’s	it.	I’ve	lost	this	bet	too.	They	have	started	from	my
face.	Rats	are	nibbling	my	toes.
I,	Ravana,	have	come	a	long	way.	Now	I	do	not	have	anything	left	to	fight
for;	 except	 this	 battle	 with	 the	 jackals.	 Tomorrow,	 there	 will	 be	 a	 procession
through	the	streets.	They’ll	raise	my	head	on	a	pole	and	parade	it	through	the
same	roads	that	saw	me	racing	by	in	my	royal	chariot.	My	people	will	throng
to	watch	this	spectacle	with	horror	and	perverted	pleasure.	I	know	my	people
well.	It	will	be	a	big	show.
One	thing	I	cannot	understand	is	why	Rama	came	and	stood	over	me	after
I	had	fallen.	He	stood	there	as	if	he	was	bestowing	his	blessings	on	me.	He	said
to	his	brother	that	I	was	the	most	learned	man	in	the	world	and	a	great	king	and
one	 could	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 governance	 from	 me.	 I	 almost	 laughed	 out	 loud.	 I
had	governed	so	well	that	t	ao	well	my	empire	lay	shattered	all	around	me.	I
could	 smell	 the	 burning	 corpses	 of	 my	 soldiers.	 I	 could	 feel	 my
Meghanada&apos;s	cold	and	lifeless	body	in	my	arms	even	now.	The	acrid	air
of	 a	 smouldering	 Trikota	 smothered	 my	 senses.	 I	 could	 not	 save	 my	 people
from	 these	 two	 warriors	 and	 their	 monkey-men.	 And	 he	 was	 saying	 I	 was	 a
great	ruler?	I	could	appreciate	the	irony	of	it.	I	wanted	to	laugh	at	my	enemy;
laugh	at	the	foolish	men	who	trusted	me	and	who	were	now	lying	all	around,
headless,	 limbless	 and	 lifeless.	 I	 wanted	 to	 laugh	 at	 the	 utopian	 dreams	 of
equality	 for	 all	 men	 on	 which	 I	 had	 built	 an	 empire.	 It	 was	 laughable	 indeed.
But	that	was	no	way	for	an	Emperor	to	die.	I	have	worked	hard	and	fought	with
the	gods	and	their	chosen	men.	I	doubt	if	heaven	has	a	place	for	people	who	die
of	laughter.

Then	just	as	suddenly	as	it	had	started,	the	rats	and	jackals	scurried	away.
A	shadow,	darker	than	the	dark	night,	fell	upon	me.	A	dark	head	with	curly	hair
blocked	 the	 lonely	 star	 from	 my	 view.	 Is	 it	 Kala,	 the	 God	 of	 death,	 who	 has
come	to	take	me	away?	I	struggled	to	open	my	eyes	wider.	But	dried	blood	held
my	eyelids	together.	Is	it	one	of	Rama’s	lowly	servants	who	has	come	to	severe
my	head	and	take	it	back	as	a	trophy?	I	want	to	look	him	in	the	face.	I	want	to
look	into	his	eyes,	unwavering	and	unflinching	in	my	last	moments.	Something
about	that	head	and	curly	hair	reminds	me	of	my	past.	Do	I	know	him?	He	leans
down	 and	 looks	 at	 my	 face.	 Ah!	 It	 is	 Bhadra.	 My	 friend,	 perhaps	 the	 only
friend	left,	but	I	do	not	know	if	I	can	call	him	my	friend.	He	was	my	servant,	a

foot	 soldier	 to	 start	 with.	 Then	 he	 got	 lost	 somewhere	 along	 the	 way.	 He
strolled	 in	 and	 out	 of	 my	 life,	 was	 sometimes	 missing	 for	 years	 together.
Bhadra	 had	 access	 to	 my	 private	 camp	 when	 I	 was	 the	 head	 of	 a	 troop	 that
resembled	a	wayside	gang	of	robbers	rather	than	a	revolutionary	army.	Then,
he	 had	 had	 access	 to	 my	 private	 chambers	 when	 I	 was	 the	 king	 of	 a	 small
island.	 Finally,	 he	 had	 access	 to	 my	 bedroom	 when	 I	 was	 ruling	 India.	 More
than	that,	Bhadra	had	access	to	the	dark	corners	of	my	mind,	a	part	that	I	hid
from	my	brothers,	my	wife,	my	lover,	my	people,	and	even	from	myself.
What	is	Bhadra	doing	here?	But	why	am	I	surprised?	This	is	just	the	place
for	people	like	him	who	move	around	in	the	shadow.	I	can	hear	him	sobbing.
Bhadra	getting	emotional?	He	was	never	angry,	sad	or	happy.	He	acted	as	if	he
was	 very	 emotional	 now.	 But	 I	 knew	 he	 had	 no	 emotions.	 And	 Bhadra	 was
aware	that	I	knew.
“Bhadra,	 carry	 me	 away	 from	 here.	 Take	 me	 away	 to…”	 My	 strength
failed	me.	Actually,	I	don’t	know	whether	the	words	actually	left	me	or	died	a
silent	 death	 somewhere	 in	 my	 throat.	 Bhadra	 shook	 his	 head.	 I	 was	 cold,
extremely	cold.	My	life	was	ebbing	out	of	me.	Then	Bhadra	hugged	my	head	to
his	bosom.	I	could	smell	his	sweat.	Pain	shot	through	me	from	every	angle	and
spread	its	poisonous	tentacles	into	my	veins.	I	moaned.	Bhadra	laid	me	back	on
the	 wet	 earth,	 wet	 from	 my	 blood,	 the	 blood	 of	 my	 people,	 the	 blood	 of	 my
dreams,	and	the	blood	of	my	life.	It	was	over.	A	sense	of	sadness	and	emptiness
descended	on	me.
“I	will	complete	your	work,	your	Highness.	Do	not	worry.	Go	in	peace.	I
will	do	it	for	our	race.	My	methods	may	be	different,	even	ignoble,	compared
to	 yours.	 I	 too,	 was	 once	 a	 warrior,	 but	 I	 have	 grown	 old.	 Arms	 frighten	 me
now.	I’m	terrified	of	war.	I	can’t	even	hurt	a	child.	Nevertheless,	my	methods
are	deadly.	I	will	get	revenge	for	you,	me	and	our	blighted	race.	Rama	wonife
d,	ama	wont	go	free	for	what	he	has	done	to	us.	Believe	me	and	go	in	peace.”
I	did	not	hear	most	of	the	things	Bhadra	said.	Strangely,	however,	I	was
soothed	 and	 slipped	 away	 from	 this	 foul-smelling	 Asura	 and	 drifted	 back	 to
my	childhood.	A	thousand	images	rushed	to	me.	My	early	struggles,	the	pangs
of	 love	 and	 abandonment,	 separation,	 battles	 and	 wars,	 music	 and	 art,	 they
flashed	 through	 my	 mind	 in	 no	 particular	 order,	 making	 no	 sense.
Meaningless,	like	life	itself.
I	 sensed	 Bhadra	 bowing	 down	 to	 touch	 my	 feet,	 then	 walking	 away.
“Bhadra.	.	.”	I	wanted	him	to	come	back	and	take	me	to	some	doctor	who	would
put	 my	 intestines	 back,	 fit	 my	 dangling	 left	 eye	 back	 into	 its	 socket	 and

somehow	blow	life	into	my	body.	I	wanted	to	withdraw	to	the	Sahyas	forests	in
the	mainland	and	start	a	guerilla	war,	as	Mahabali	had	done	years	ago.	I	wanted
to	start	again.	I	wanted	to	make	the	same	mistakes,	love	the	same	people,	fight
the	same	enemies,	befriend	the	same	friends,	marry	the	same	wives	and	sire	the
same	sons.	I	wanted	to	live	the	same	life	again.	I	didn’t	want	the	seat	Rama	has
reserved	for	me	in	his	heaven.	I	only	wanted	my	beautiful	earth.
I	knew	such	things	were	not	going	to	happen.	I	was	sixty,	not	sixteen.	If	I
lived,	I	would	be	a	one-eyed,	dirty,	old	beggar	in	some	wayside	temple,	with
stinking,	 tattered	 clothes.	 A	 long	 way	 from	 what	 I	 once	 was.	 I	 wanted	 to	 die
now.	I	wanted	this	to	end.	I	wanted	to	go	away.	Let	the	burning	cities	take	care
of	themselves.	Let	the	Asuras	fight	their	own	wars	and	be	damned	along	with
the	Devas.	I	only	wanted	to	return	to	my	childhood	and	start	over	again,	every
single	damn	thing,	again	and	again,	and	again.	.	.

2	THE	SEED
Ravana
The	monsoon	wind	swirled	around	the	small	hut	hanging	precariously	on
a	mountain	cliff.	Another	push	by	the	roaring	wind	and	the	hut	would	plunge
into	the	black	torrents	waiting	hungrily	below.	Then	we	would	be	just	specks	of
death	washed	ashore.	It	would	have	been	better	had	it	ended	like	that.	But	this
was	 just	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 end.	 Could	 I	 be	 obliterated	 from	 the	 leaves	 of
history	–	just	like	that?	Hadn’t	I	a	mission	to	fail?	I	didn’t	know	it	then,	but	I
had	 been	 born	 to	 fulfil	 someone	 else’s	 destiny.	 To	 allow	 someone	 else	 to
become	God.
Huddled	together	with	three	siblings	and	a	morose	mother,	I	looked	down
at	the	brightly	lit	palace	of	my	half-brother.	It	was	quite	near,	yet	a	world	apart.
I	had	been	there	once,	hidden	behind	the	shawl	of	my	poor,	black	mother,	my
younger	brothers	tugging	at	my	fingers.	My	sister	was	lying	limp	like	a	dirty
old	rag,	tired	and	hungry,	on	my	mother ’s	shoulder.	We	were	poor,	dirt	poor.
The	only	thing	we	had	in	abundance	was	poverty.	And	hunger.	Also	shame.
As	a	last	desperate	effort,	mother	dragged	us	to	beg	before	her	stepson,
Kubera,	 the	 lord	 of	 all	 wealth,	 the	 richest	 man	 on	 earth.	 In	 the	 glitter	 of	 the
palace	 and	 the	 sickening	 fragrance	 of	 abundance,	 we	 stood	 there	 with	 a
begging	bowl.	We	got	our	alms,	a	few	pieces	of	gold	and	also	many	derisive
glances	from	my	stepbrother ’s	wives.	Our	needs	were	few	and	his	time	was	too
precious	to	waste	on	us.	A	flick	of	his	hand,	some	small	change,	and	he	thought
no	more	of	us.	Until	the	day	I	reminded	him	of	our	existence	quite	rudely	and
loudly.	But	that	happened	much	later.	By	then	we	had	ceased	being	beggars.
I	gained	my	biggest	asset	from	that	arrogantly	opulent	palace	of	avarice
and	greed	–	my	burning	ambition.	The	fire	of	hunger	would	never	quench	the
flames	 of	 ambition	 the	 palace	 ignited	 in	 me.	 I	 knew	 then	 that	 the	 world	 ttehe

owned	 and	 much	 beyond,	 would	 be	 mine	 and	 mine	 alone.	 Today	 might	 very
well	 be	 the	 last	 day	 I	 will	 be	 with	 my	 mother.	 Tomorrow,	 if	 our	 small	 hut
survives	this	torrential	rain,	we	will	start	our	journey.	I	believe	there	is	a	world
out	there	to	conquer.	A	better	world	awaiting	us.
My	brothers	and	I	never	had	an	 education	to	 speak	of.	No	Brahmin	was
ready	to	take	us	for	free	even	if	we	worked	for	them.	We	were	wild,	black	and
naughty.	 We	 had	 learned	 that	 we	 were	 half-castes.	 Our	 father	 was	 a	 famous
Maharishi,	 but	 had	 little	 use	 for	 us.	 He	 was	 immersed	 in	 his	 own	 world	 of
learning	to	care	about	his	progeny.	He	was	a	Brahmin.	My	mother	was	of	an
unknown	Asura	caste.	He	kept	the	relationship	an	open	secret.	He	knew	enough
of	 the	Sanskrit	Vedas,	which	 the	Brahmins	claimed	contained	 all	the	learning
of	the	world.
Father	 wasn’t	 a	 bad	 man,	 really.	 He	 was	 like	 any	 other	 member	 of	 his
caste;	gloriously	self-centered.	He	considered	that	we	were	suitably	rewarded
with	his	mere	presence	in	our	home.	And	conveniently	forgot	that	humans	need
food	to	live,	too.	Oh	sure,	he	named	us	after	demons	as	we	never	showed	any
interest	 in	 his	 teachings.	 Many	 a	 time,	 we	 mocked	 him	 and	 ever	 so	 often,	 I
boldly	 questioned	 his	 faith	 when	 he	 and	 his	 friends	 chanted	 the	 Vedas.	 In	 our
mud	 veranda,	 Kumbakarna,	 Soorpanakha	 and	 I	 mimicked	 them.	 Only	 my
youngest	sibling,	Vibhishana,	watched	with	awe.	His	eyes	used	to	be	fixed	on
the	Brahmins	as	he	listened	to	their	jabbering	with	rapt	attention.
This	 was	 after	 my	 father	 gave	 away	 all	 his	 money	 to	 my	 stepbrother,
Kubera.	 We	 were	 left	 with	 nothing.	 Growing	 up	 was	 difficult,	 a	 continuous
numbing	ache,	the	kind	which	throbs	and	slowly	spreads	its	black	fingers	over
one’s	soul.	Yet,	we	never	strayed	from	the	path	of	righteousness.	Our	sense	of
justice	 differed	 from	 what	 the	 learned	 and	 privileged	 considered	 right.	 We
decided	 our	 righteousness	 and	 we	 defined	 our	 rights	 in	 our	 own	 way.	 We
learned	that	the	truth	could	be	bent	to	suit	one’s	needs.	Our	dharma	was	based
on	simple	things:	a	man	should	be	true	to	his	word;	he	should	speak	from	his
heart	 and	 shouldn’t	 do	 anything	 he	 considered	 wrong.	 One	 should	 not	 cheat
even	if	one	was	sure	to	fail.	One	should	honour	women	and	not	insult	anyone.
If	there	was	injustice,	we	had	to	fight	it	at	all	costs.	We	never	knew	any	of	the
great	teachings	of	the	ancient	Asura	or	Deva	saints.	We	followed	no	tradition.
We	were	almost	bastards.
The	next	day,	we	would	be	leaving	this	island.	I	had	heard	that	there	are
great	nations	to	the	north.	I	would	travel	across	the	length	and	breadth	of	India.
I	wanted	to	climb	the	snow	clad	mountains	of	the	Himalayas,	swim	against	the

dangerous	currents	of	the	Ganga	raging	in	her	full	monsoon	fury.	I	dreamed
of	passing	through	the	thick	forests	of	the	Vindhya	and	Sahyas	and	seeing	the
monkey	men	and	the	kingdom	of	the	Yakshas	and	Kinnaras.	I	dreamed	of	being
in	 the	 music-filled	 world	 of	 the	 Gandharvas.	 Oh,	 what	 a	 world	 to	 conquer!
What	a	life	to	enjoy!	One	day	Ravana	would	rule	the	world.	From	the	mighty
Himalayas	to	Lanka,	nay,	from	Lanka	to	the	Himalayas;	I	would	rule	the	world;
with	justice,	peace	and	prosperity	for	all.
Looming	 in	 the	 shadows	 of	 my	 myriad	 dreams,	 there	 lingered	 a	 small
doubt.	 Were	 these	 wonderful	 dreams	 just	 hunger-induced	 hallucinations?	 I
might	 die	 today,	 caressed	 by	 the	 black	 waves	 and	 dragged	 by	 the	 roaring
currents.	My	life	might	just	flicker	 for	 a	while	 and	end	in	dark	silence.	Then
who	would	ever	now	the	passions	and	ambitions	I	held	close	to	my	heart?	Who
would	know	what	glories	I	had	planned	for	my	people?	My	life	would	be	just
like	 the	 foam	 on	 the	 frothing	 black	 waters	 down	 below,	 soaring,	 everexpanding,	there	now	but	then	gone	into	the	unknown.
My	mother ’s	tears	burned	a	hole	in	my	soul.	She	wanted	us	to	go	out	and
conquer	the	world,	yet	she	wanted	us	nearby	as	well.	Perhaps,	she	saw	the	fire
raging	in	my	eyes	and	decided	not	to	uldided	nostop	us.	When	I	looked	back,	I
saw	 my	 mother,	 a	 hunched-back	 figure	 in	 tattered	 clothes,	 hugging	 my	 ugly
sister.	She	was	the	most	beautiful	baby	for	us,	but	when	I	saw	her	with	the	sense
of	 fairness	 my	 mother	 had	 instilled	 in	 us,	 I	 had	 to	 reluctantly	 agree	 with	 my
father ’s	belief	that	my	sister	was	the	ugliest	creature	he	had	ever	seen.	I	hated
him	for	that	statement.	I	hated	him	even	more	for	the	fact	that	it	was	true.
The	gatekeeper	of	my	half	brother ’s	palace	was	sitting	on	the	beach	with
his	 friends.	 They	 roared	 with	 laughter	 at	 the	 sight	 of	 us	 three	 teenagers
struggling	 with	 the	 catamaran	 and	 raised	 a	 toast	 to	 our	 death.	 They	 even
insulted	 my	 mother	 with	 indecent	 songs.	 I	 wanted	 to	 wring	 their	 necks!	 But	 I
had	promised	my	mother	that	I	would	not	use	violence	until	I	got	wise	to	the
ways	 of	 the	 world	 and	 the	 sense	 to	 use	 my	 power	 with	 fairness	 and	 justice.	 I
fixed	my	teary	eyes	on	the	distant	shoreline	–	there	lay	my	hope	of	success	in
this	cruel	world,	my	world	and	my	guru.
My	brothers	and	I	travelled	through	the	thick,	evergreen	Sahya	forest.	We
saw	 glorious	 palaces	 and	 ports;	 ivory	 and	 sandalwood	 and	 peacocks	 and
monkeys.	 We	 saw	 ships	 with	 kaleidoscopic-coloured	 sails	 sailing	 to	 distant
lands,	laden	with	gold	and	diamonds,	pepper	and	spices.	We	saw	temples	where
the	 Gods	 resided	 and	 demanded	 a	 portion	 of	 the	 earnings	 which	 men	 strived
hard	to	earn.	And	we	also	saw	the	representatives	of	those	gods	who	plundered

in	God’s	name.	The	cities	were	bright	with	lights	as	brilliant	as	the	sun	and	the
women,	 beautiful	 like	 those	 in	 paradise.	 I	 saw	 with	 mixed	 emotions	 of	 pride,
jealousy	and	anger,	the	ships	on	which	my	half-brother ’s	flags	fluttered.
Whichever	city	we	went	to,	Kubera’s	enterprises	had	an	office.	He	ran	a
tightly	 controlled	 business	 empire	 from	 his	 palace	 in	 the	 island.	 Equestrian
messengers	carried	important	letters	to	his	business	partners	and	trade	guilds.
He	owned	more	than	a	130	ships,	which	sailed	to	Greece,	Egypt	and	China.	I
was	sure	any	junior	manager	of	his	numerous	units	would	have	welcomed	us
to	 their	 gold-brocaded	 offices,	 had	 we	 identified	 ourselves	 as	 Kubera’s
siblings.	But	that	was	the	last	thing	I	wanted	to	do.
I	could	have	easily	led	a	comfortable	life	as	a	clerk	in	any	one	of	my	halfbrothers	offices.	It	would	have	ensured	that	my	family	got	at	least	one	meal	a
day.	But	how	could	I	forget	the	bored	look	in	my	step-brother ’s	eyes	when	he
dismissed	 us	 from	 his	 palace	 with	 a	 few	 gold	 coins?	 I	 would	 rather	 die	 of
hunger	 than	 demean	 myself	 for	 a	 lowly	 job	 in	 his	 business	 empire.	 It	 might
have	been	false	pride.	Many	worldly-wise	people	have	said	so,	to	get	along	in
the	 world	 you	 had	 to	 be	 practical	 and	 satisfied	 with	 what	 your	 measly	 life
offers.	But	I	was	a	dreamer.	And	I	did	not	want	to	just	get	along	in	this	world.	I
wanted	 to	 own	 it.	 Why	 were	 our	 people	 so	 meek	 and	 humble?	 That	 was
something	I	always	wondered	about.	Why	were	only	a	few	able	to	control	the
power	and	wealth	while	the	rest	obliged	them,	and	even	laid	down	their	lives	to
help	 this	 small	 selfish	 gang	 oppress	 them	 and	 their	 children?	 Was	 it	 fear?	 I
don’t	 know.	 But	 wherever	 I	 looked,	 I	 only	 saw	 oppression.	 Money,	 caste,
rituals,	traditions,	beliefs	and	superstitions	all	conspired	together	to	crush	the
humble	majority.	Why	couldn’t	there	be	a	more	just	way	of	living?
The	moment	I	started	asking	why,	I	was	branded	a	hothead.	The	Brahmin
friends	 of	 my	 father	 once	 tried	 to	 banish	 me	 from	 the	 village	 saying	 I	 was
possessed	by	evil	spirits	and	that	I	was	a	Rakshasa,	a	demon.	Perhaps	I	was	too
young	 and	 brash	 and	 my	 view	 of	 the	 world	 was	 yet	 to	 get	 tempered	 with
experience.	Except	for	my	youngest	brother	Vibhishana,	who	was	always	quiet,
I	could	see	the	same	restlessness	in	the	rest	of	us.	I	believed	Vibhishana	was	a
bit	of	a	nitwit.	But	he	idewit.	Buwas	the	darling	of	our	village	while	we	were
growing	up.	He	followed	whatever	was	laid	down	in	the	books	and	never	asked
any	 questions.	 There	 were	 many	 times	 when	 I	 felt	 that	 Vibhishana	 was	 most
suited	for	this	society	and	that	he	was	going	to	make	it	big	in	life.	And	I	liked
him.	He	was	so	small	and	vulnerable	and	I	always	felt	he	needed	to	be	protected
from	this	cruel	world.

I	 desperately	 needed	 some	 confidence.	 I	 wasn’t	 intelligent	 in	 the
conventional	 sense	 either.	 I	 could	 not	 recite	 the	 Vedas	 backwards	 the	 way
Vibhishana	 enjoyed	 doing.	 In	 any	 case,	 I	 thought	 the	 Vedas	 were	 a	 load	 of
humbug	 and	 it	 didn’t	 matter	 which	 way	 you	 recited	 them.	 Some	 jobless
Brahmin	 like	 my	 father,	 created	 them	 thousands	 of	 years	 ago.	 Instead	 of
making	 themselves	 useful,	 the	 Brahmins	 prayed	 to	 the	 Gods	 they	 themselves
invented	for	the	rain,	the	sun,	horses,	cows	and	money	and	many	other	things.
It	 must	 have	 been	 very	 cold,	 from	 whichever	 cursed	 places	 they	 came.
Otherwise,	 why	 would	 they	 croak	 like	 frogs	 and	 appeal	 to	 the	 Gods	 after
putting	hundreds	of	assorted	twigs	into	the	fire?
Perhaps	I	was	prejudiced.	I	shouldn’t	think	that	the	work	they	were	doing,
as	 Yajnas,	 was	 useless.	 In	 fact,	 it	 served	 as	 a	 perfect	 tool	 to	 mint	 money	 and
gain	material	favours.	They	were	no	fools-these	Brahmins.	They	knew	how	to
project	 even	 the	 mundane	 tasks	 of	 burning	 twigs	 as	 earth-shaking,	 scientific
discoveries	 and	 claimed	 to	 tame	 the	 forces	 that	 controlled	 the	 world.	 And	 it
was	funny	that	the	majority	of	people	like	the	carpenters,	masons	and	farmers
who	were	doing	something	meaningful,	had	become	supplicant	to	these	jokers
croaking	 under	 the	 warm	 sun,	 sweat	 pouring	 from	 their	 faces	 in	 front	 of	 a
raging	fire	and	chanting	God	knows	what.
They	 had	 a	 Yajna	 or	 a	 Puja	 for	 everything	 under	 the	 sun.	 If	 you	 had
leprosy	 or	 a	 common	 cold,	 there	 was	 a	 God	 to	 whom	 you	 had	 to	 offer	 a
special	puja	to	appease	him.	You	wanted	your	pestering	wife	to	elope	with	your
bothersome	neighbour,	there	was	a	puja	for	that	too.	You	wanted	your	cow	to
have	a	calf	or	your	wife	to	have	son,	the	Brahmin	would	help	you.	He	would
just	conduct	a	Puja	and	a	divine	calf	or	son	would	be	born.	You	curried	favour
with	the	Brahmins	and	your	son	would	become	the	biggest	pundit	in	the	world
by	the	age	of	sixteen.	If	not,	he	would	perhaps	become	rowdy	like	me,	who	did
not	respect	Brahmins	or	rituals.	He	would	become	a	Rakshasa.	I	think	there	are
many	more	Rakshasas	among	us	now.	Perhaps,	it	was	because	the	‘why?’	virus
spread.	Couldn’t	the	Brahmins	conduct	a	puja	so	that	our	heads	were	cleared	of
sinful	thoughts?	This	is	something	I	have	to	ponder	over	when	I	have	time.
Wherever	I	travel	I	find	imposters	claiming	to	have	direct	access	to	god
and	 fleecing	 people.	 It	 is	 strange	 how	 kings	 of	 antiquity	 suddenly	 became
Gods.	How	they	metamorphosed	into	specialty	Gods	is	even	more	amusing.	I
am	no	atheist.	I	strongly	believe	in	God	and	am	always	willing	to	pray	for	my
material	and	spiritual	progress.	But	for	me,	God	is	a	very	personal	thing	and
prayer 	needs	to	be	spoken	silently	in	my	heart.

3	Captives
Ravana
The	 Asuras	 were	 a	 casteless	 society	 and	 had	 a	 highly	 democratic	 set	 up
where	an	elected	council,	instead	of	a	king,	held	actual	power.	They	were	also
a	 roaming	 tribe,	 hunting	 and	 raiding	 for	 their	 existence,	 but	 somewhere,
perhaps	2000	years	ago,	they	settled	down	in	cities	and	towns	along	the	river	b
wifanks.	It	has	been	said	that	the	Asura	kingdoms	had	roads	paved	in	gold.	But
what	 an	 empire	 they	 built!	 It	 sprawled	 from	 the	 Indus	 in	 the	 west	 to	 the
Brahmaputra	in	the	east,	and	from	the	Himalayas	in	the	north	to	the	Narmada	in
the	 south.	 It	 could	 easily	 have	 been	 the	 biggest	 empire	 on	 earth	 at	 that	 time.
When	the	kings	of	Egypt	were	busy	building	great	tombs	to	bury	themselves,
the	democratic	council	of	the	Asura	kingdom	was	busy	laying	roads,	building
hospitals,	 drainage	 systems	 and	 everything	 they	 thought	 was	 useful	 for	 the
people.
My	 mother	 claimed	 that	 she	 belonged	 to	 a	 prominent	 Asura	 tribe,	 the
Hethis.	Few	believed	her.	However,	it	made	me	proud	to	think	that	I	did	indeed,
belong	to	an	elite	Asura	tribe.	Though	Asuras	were	never	overtly	religious,	we
had	 our	 own	 gods.	 Prominent	 among	 them	 was	 Shiva	 or	 Parameswara.	 We
learned	that	Shiva	was	a	great	Asura	king	of	antiquity,	when	the	Asuras	were	a
wandering	 tribe.	 I	 love	 to	 think	 that	 he	 is	 The	 God.	 He	 was	 my	 personal
favourite.
It	 might	 have	 been	 about	 a	 1000	 years	 ago,	 when	 the	 horse-mounted,
savage	tribes	of	central	Jambu	Dweepa	plundered	the	Asura	cities	in	the	great
plains.	 A	 council	 of	 ten	 kings	 led	 the	 mighty	 Asura,	 and	 they	 met	 the	 horse
riding	 savages.	 The	 mighty	 Asura	 army	 met	 the	 horse-riding	 savage	 tribes
near	 the	 river	 Jhelum.	 The	 leader	 of	 the	 plunderers	 was	 named	 Indra,	 who
through	 his	 atrocities	 had	 earned	 the	 title,	 Purendara	 or	 ‘Slayer	 of	 Cities’.

Thousands	were	slain;	women	irrespective	of	age,	were	gang-raped,	children
burnt	 alive	 and	 granaries	 plundered.	 Magnificent	 cities	 crumbled.	 A
civilization	was	destroyed	and	the	clock	of	progress	was	set	back	by	centuries.
The	Asuras	lost	everything	and	they	fled	to	the	south.	The	Nagas	withdrew	to
the	 eastern	 hills	 and	 the	 Kinnara	 and	 Yaksha	 kingdoms	 were	 wiped	 out.	 The
Gandharvas	became	a	wandering	tribe	and	soon	got	long	lost	in	the	bylanes	of
history	and	mythology.
The	 Asura	 civilization	 was	 at	 its	 peak	 during	 the	 invasion,	 but	 they	 had
lost	 their	 fighting	 power.	 Culture,	 music,	 art,	 architecture	 had	 conspired	 to
blunt	the	fighting	prowess	of	the	asura	armies,	which	in	fact,	was	nothing	but	a
charade.	There	was	no	efficient	leadership,	no	professional	command	and	no
strategy	or	plan	for	national	defence.	It	was	no	wonder	that	the	mighty	Asura
army	was	routed	by	a	handful	of	aggressors	under	Indra’s	dynamic	leadership.
Of	 course,	 the	 supremacy	 of	 the	 Asura	 race	 could	 have	 been	 highly
exaggerated.	 A	 defeated	 race	 often	 uses	 its	 cultural	 supremacy	 to	 cover	 the
shame	of	defeat.	The	victorious	party	was	always	portrayed	as	barbarians	who
defeated	 and	 destroyed	 a	 highly-cultured	 and	 well-developed	 civilization
through	deceit	and	sorcery.
But	the	Asuras	fought	back.	They	staged	a	battle	from	the	south	to	reclaim
their	lost	land.	They	won	occasional	victories	and	even	held	sway	over	all	of
India	at	times.	However,	it	was	the	intellectual	war	that	they	were	losing.	Tribes
which	 came	 from	 the	 north-west,	 had	 begun	 losing	 their	 moorings	 and	 a
synthesis	 with	 the	 Asuras	 had	 begun.	 They	 stole	 the	 great	 Asura	 God,	 Shiva.
Brahma,	the	teacher,	also	became	their	god.	However,	the	most	prominent	God
who	 suddenly	 appeared	 was	 Vishnu.	 The	 Brahmins,	 who	 were	 the	 official
priests	 of	 the	 Devas,	 began	 formulating	 complicated	 rituals.	 They	 found	 that
the	main	strength	of	the	Asura	cities	was	its	cosmopolitan	culture.	The	Asuras
were	 a	 free	 people.	 Their	 fertile	 imagination	 made	 Shiva	 into	 a	 lovable	 God
who	demanded	nothing,	and	no	ritual	was	required	to	pray	to	him.	He	was	the
Asura’s	 friend,	 cousin,	 son,	 father,	 or	 anything	 one	 could	 imagine.	 In	 many
cities,	Shiva	was	portrayed	as	a	phallus,	to	celebrate	virility	and	fertility.
Once	the	cities	were	conquered	and	the	temples	destroyed,	the	Brahmins
demanded	the	conquered	people	worship	a	for	Cwor
The	Deva	capital	city	of	Amaravathi,	paled	before	Patala	–	the	temporary
capital	of	the	Asuras	in	exile.	Amaravathi,	once	a	huge	city	at	the	mouth	of	the
Saraswati	river,	was	now	a	miserable	old	shanty	town.	It	was	built	by	the	Asura
school	of	Mayans,	who	were	great	city	builders.	Almost	all	the	available	books

on	 art	 and	 architecture,	 city–planning,	 parks	 and	 amusement	 centres,	 temples
and	 theatres,	 had	 been	 produced	 by	 them.	 Once	 the	 Devas	 settled	 in	 the	 great
northern	 plains,	 they	 started	 building	 a	 few	 scattered	 cities	 and	 founded	 their
own	 school	 of	 art	 and	 architecture.	 But	 the	 Vishwakarma	 school	 paled	 in
comparison	 to	 the	 Mayan,	 even	 though	 ideas	 were	 liberally	 lifted	 from	 the
Mayan	books.	What	they	achieved,	as	far	as	I	heard,	was	some	shanty	towns	on
the	 river	 banks	 of	 the	 north.	 Mithila	 and	 Ayodhya	 could	 perhaps	 have	 been
their	best	towns.	Going	by	the	accounts	of	travelling	mendicants	like	Narada,
who	was	an	inveterate	liar,	these	towns	were	neat	and	not	overgrown	like	the
others	that	abounded	on	the	northern	plains.
I	had	never	ventured	this	far	north	but	wherever	I	travelled,	I	saw	unrest.
The	 Deva	 empire	 was	 slowly	 crumbling	 under	 the	 relentless	 pressure	 of
guerilla	warfare.	I	could	feel	the	distant	rumblings	of	a	massive	uprising.	For
years	 the	 defeated	 Asura	 tribes	 had	 been	 fighting	 a	 bitter	 war	 but	 were	 only
partially	successful	in	reclaiming	the	asura	territory.	For	a	few	years,	some	life
was	injected	into	the	dead	dreams	of	the	Asuras	by	men	like	 Mahabali	 of	 the
Keralaputra	 tribe,	 who	 held	 sway	 over	 all	 of	 India	 for	 about	 18	 years	 or	 the
supposedly	invincible	twins,	Hiranyakasupu	and	Hiranyaksha,	in	south-central
India.	But	they	all	collapsed	soon	enough.
Initially,	 the	 Asuras	 had	 superior	 warfare	 strategies,	 better	 engineers	 to
create	 machines	 of	 war	 and	 great	 generals	 and	 kings	 to	 lead	 the	 battle	 with
valour.	 But	 the	 cunning	 of	 the	 Devas	 and	 the	 treachery	 of	 their	 own	 people
ensured	that	the	Asuras	snatched	defeat	from	the	jaws	of	victory.	It	was	obvious
that	 the	 Asuras	 lacked	 unity.	 One–upmanship,	 false	 pride,	 overconfidence	 in
their	powers	and	of	course,	the	belief	that	the	Devas	would	fight	the	war	fairly;
something	that	the	Devas	always	believed	but	seldom	practised,	ensured	that	the
Asura	tribe	would	wander	in	the	wilderness	of	India	for	a	1000	years.
And	then	began	an	intermingling	of	the	tribes.	No	one	can	really	claim	to
have	 pure	 Deva	 or	 Asura	 blood.	 The	 deep	 black	 Asuras	 mixed	 with	 the	 pale
Devas,	who	in	turn	mixed	with	various	shades	of	skin	colour	ranging	from	the
yellow	of	the	Gandharvas,	to	the	pure	white	of	the	Kinnaras,	and	the	pitch	black
of	the	Yakshas.	It	was	not	unusual	to	find	a	pitch	black	Deva	maiden	with	blue
eyes	or	an	Asura	man	with	yellow	skin	and	brown	hair.	Nor	was	it	considered
extraordinary	 to	 have	 a	 coal	 black	 brother	 with	 grey	 eyes	 and	 straight	 hair,
Ctra	an	A	a	very	fair	sister	with	dark	eyes	and	wavy	hair	and	another	sibling
with	 yellow	 skin	 and	 curly	 black	 hair	 in	 the	 same	 family.	 I	 myself	 am	 fair
complexioned	with	thick	wavy	hair	and	deep	black	eyes.	My	sister	is	as	dark	as

midnight	with	straight	hair	and	brown	eyes.	Kumbakarna	is	stocky	with	black
skin	 and	 black	 curly	 hair	 and	 black	 eyes,	 whereas	 Vibhishna	 is	 light	 brown
with	light	blue	eyes	and	brown	wavy	hair.
Mixed	races	were	held	in	contempt	earlier.	The	Devas	shunned	them	like
lepers	 and	 they	 were	 laughed	 at	 by	 the	 Asuras.	 Stung	 by	 social	 antipathy	 and
disdain,	 a	 group	 of	 this	 mixed	 race	 withdrew	 to	 the	 forests	 of	 central	 India.
They	 were	 weak	 and	 uncultured,	 even	 by	 Deva	 standards	 and	 chattered
incessantly	without	doing	any	productive	work.	They	led	a	crude	and	miserable
existence	collecting	berries	and	honey	from	 the	forests,	 living	in	tree	houses
and	 caves	 and	 occasionally	 raiding	 nearby	 villages	 in	 search	 of	 gold	 and
women.	 They	 came	 to	 be	 called	 the	 monkey	 tribe	 –	 the	 Vanaras.	 They	 were
mostly	 ignored	 and	 often	 considered	 boors.	 In	 the	 Deva	 or	 Asura	 languages,
the	 word	 Vanara	 was	 a	 curse	 word	 and	 to	 call	 someone	 a	 Vanara	 was	 the
ultimate	insult	which	resulted	in	duels	and	death.
The	 Vanaras	 led	 a	 miserable	 life	 until	 Bali	 appeared.	 He	 burst	 upon	 the
scene	like	a	clap	of	thunder	in	summer.	Bali	was	a	great	tactician	and	a	superb
military	 general.	 After	 suppressing	 the	 opposition	 in	 his	 Vanara	 tribe,	 he
became	 their	 supreme	 leader	 and	 a	 brutal	 dictator.	 Along	 with	 his	 younger
brother	 Sugreeva,	 Bali	 raided	 both	 the	 Asura	 and	 Deva	 tribes	 several	 times
from	his	capital,	Kishkindha,	on	the	banks	of	the	river	Tungabhadra.	Soon	the
Vanaras	extended	their	sway	from	the	Western	Mountains	to	the	Eastern	Hills
and	 were	 threatening	 the	 borders	 of	 Lanka.	 In	 the	 north,	 all	 the	 petty	 Deva
kingdoms	 up	 to	 the	 Ganges	 River	 lived	 under	 constant	 fear.	 But	 Bali
maintained	 a	 peaceful	 relationship	 with	 Karthi	 Veerarjuna,	 a	 powerful	 tribal
monarch	and	descendent	of	an	aborigine	tribe,	who	were	the	original	settlers
of	India.	He	ruled	the	narrow	coastal	strip	on	the	west	coast	between	the	sea	and
some	 table–land	 on	 either	 side	 of	 the	 Vindhya	 mountains,	 on	 the	 banks	 of
Narmada.
The	 situation	 was	 dangerous.	 Power	 balanced	 precariously	 between
Karthi	Veerarjuna	in	the	west,	Bali	in	Central	India,	the	decimated	Indra	empire
(split	 up	 as	 numerous	 petty	 Deva	 kingdoms	 between	 the	 Himalayas	 and	 the
mighty	 rivers	 of	 the	 north),	 and	 the	 warring	 Asura	 tribes	 of	 the	 South.	 The
condition	of	the	Asuras	was	the	most	miserable.	Poverty,	disease,	famine	and
misery	ravaged	the	once-famed	cities.	Apart	from	the	architectural	splendour
and	thriving	commerce	of	a	few	port	towns	like	Muzuris	and	Kaveripattinam,
the	 majority	 of	 Asuras	 lived	 in	 squalor,	 without	 any	 hope	 or	 self-esteem.
Money	 was	 concentrated	 amongst	 a	 few	 like	 my	 step-brother,	 Kubera.	 The

military	leadership	wasted	themselves	fighting	foolish	wars	with	the	Devas,	the
aborigines,	 the	 Vanaras,	 but	 more	 frequently,	 among	 themselves,	 without	 any
plan	or	strategy.
We	 crossed	 the	 river	 Poorna.	 The	 forest	 lay	 trapped	 and	 immobile,
tangled	 in	 a	 haze	 of	 creepers	 and	 vines.	 I	 was	 rather	 apprehensive.	 These
forests	 had	 become	 hiding	 places	 for	 guerillas	 belonging	 to	 various	 Asura
tribes.	 We	 decided	 to	 continue	 but	 were	 suddenly	 surrounded	 by	 a	 group	 of
armed	men.	I	was	impressed	at	the	skill	with	which	they	surrounded	us.	Twenty
taut	bows	were	ready	to	sing.	I	stopped	Kumbhakarana	with	a	glance.	The	oaf
was	 struggling	 to	 get	 his	 rusted	 sword	 out	 of	 its	 tattered	 sheath.	 I	 was	 not	 a
coward,	but	the	three	of	us	were	no	match	for	the	twenty	archers	surrounding
us.	 This	 wasn’t	 the	 time	 to	 play	 hero	 and	 I	 didn’t	 know	 whether	 they	 were
Karthiveerarjuna’s	policemen	or	Asura	guerilla	fighters.	They	were	too	dark
to	be	Devas.
A	 well-built	 man	 with	 greying	 hair	 approached	 us	 and	 pointed	 his	 s
Cpoiters.	Thword	 at	my	neck.	Another,	much	younger,	started	searching	us.	I
was	wondering	if	I	could	kick	the	man	in	the	groin	and	get	hold	of	his	throat,
when	another	man	pressed	the	tip	of	his	sword	to	the	hollow	of	Vibhishana’s
throat.	My	brave	young	brother	started	whimpering.	I	got	the	message	and	kept
calm.	This	is	no	time	for	heroics,	I	told	myself.	Then,	tied	and	blindfolded,	we
were	half-led,	half-dragged	through	the	bushes	and	heavy	undergrowth	of	the
jungle.

4	Guru
Ravana
We	stood	shivering	inside	a	cave,	waiting	for	someone	to	appear.	There
were	 noises	 emanating	 from	 its	 depths.	 Suddenly	 all	 the	 noises	 ceased	 and	 a
frightening	 hush	 descended.	 My	 heart	 was	 beating	 violently	 and	 I	 was
embarrassed	 to	 find	 Vibhishana	 crying.	 My	 heart	 went	 out	 to	 my	 younger
brother.	He	was	so	innocent	about	the	ways	of	the	world.
And	 then	 a	 deep,	 resonating	 voice	 ordered	 that	 our	 blindfolds	 be
removed.	As	they	were	lifted	and	our	eyes	adjusted	to	the	darkness	inside	the
cave,	we	saw	a	very	old	man	seated	on	a	large	stone	chair.	He	stared	intently	at
us.	I	held	my	head	high	and	glared	back	at	him.	Slowly,	imperceptibly	at	first,
but	then	engulfing	his	whole	face,	a	smile	crossed	his	face.	As	if	touched	by	a
magic	wand,	the	tough	and	mean-looking	old	man	was	transformed	into	a	man
of	 vigour	 and	 vitality.	 His	 face	 emanated	 a	 serenity	 beyond	 words.	 His	 smile
conveyed	 the	 wisdom	 of	 ages.	 Slowly	 recognition	 dawned	 on	 me,	 it	 was
Mahabali!
Here	 was	 the	 greatest	 and	 mightiest	 of	 all	 Asura	 kings.	 The	 wise,	 the
strong,	 the	 learned,	 the	 kind,	 the	 perpetrator	 of	 social	 justice,	 the	 icon	 of
dharma	 –	 paeans	 run	 out	 when	 one	 thinks	 of	 Mahabali.	 But	 was	 a	 hint	 of
contempt	hovering	at	the	back	of	my	mind?	Mahabali	had	conducted	brilliant
military	campaigns,	vanquished	his	foes	and	ruled	over	a	continent	justly,	but
he	 lost	 his	 empire	 because	 he	 did	 not	 want	 to	 back	 out	 of	 a	 promise	 he	 had
given	to	a	poor	Deva	Brahmin,	Vamana	Vishnu,	seeking	alms	from	the	mighty
Emperor.	When	Mahabali’s	reign	was	at	its	summit,	the	Emperor	conducted	a
Rajasooya,	to	proclaim	his	suzerainty	over	all	of	India.	Kings,	chieftains,	rajas
and	maharajas,	belonging	to	all	the	tribes	and	kingdoms	of	India	assembled	at
the	Asura	capital	of	Muzuris	to	pay	homage	to	the	king	of	kings,	Mahabali.	As

a	part	of	the	ritual,	the	Emperor	promised	a	boon	to	anyone	who	asked	for	it.	It
was	 at	 that	 time	 that	 the	 Vamana	 Vishnu,	 disguised	 as	 a	 poor	 Brahmin	 boy,
asked	for	three	feet	of	land	to	set	up	a	Brahminical	learning	centre	in	the	Asura
capital.	Not	wanting	to	go	back	on	his	promise,	Mahabali	gave	permission	to
Deva	Brahmins	to	preach	their	religion	in	the	Asura	capital.	Soon,	this	small
centre	 grew	 into	 a	 massive	 missionary	 institution.	 It	 became	 the	 hot-bed	 of
conspiracy	 and	 court	 intrigue.	 Finally,	 before	 the	 Asura	 elite	 could	 work	 out
what	had	hit	them,	Deva	Brahmins	had	overcome	the	last	Asura	empire.
Mahabali	was	banished	to	the	underworld	and	the	empire	he	had	built	for
over	 two	 decades,	 soon	 exploded	 into	 hundreds	 of	 warring	 petty	 kingdoms.
But	Mahabali	continued	to	live	on	in	legend.	I	was	amazed	to	see	my	childhood
hero	 in	 the	 flesh.	 But	 I	 was	 disappointed	 as	 well.	 Mahabali	 did	 not	 match	 the
chiselled	image	of	my	hero	which	a	hundred	childhood	fairytales	and	legends
had	sculpted	in	my	mind.
“We	 have	 been	 trailing	 you	 for	 the	 last	 few	 weeks.	 What	 brings	 you	 to
these	parts	where	no	one	dares	to	tread?	These	are	dangerous	times	and	this	is
no	place	for	fools	like	you	to	loiter	about.”	The	deep	voice	boomed	through
the	caves	and	snapped	me	back	from	my	reminiscences.

I	bowed	to	the	great	soul	before	me	and	said,	“Great
King,	 we	 are	 seekers	 of	 fortune.	 We	 are	 from	 the	 Pearl
island	of	Lanka	in	the	southern	seas.”	I	tasted	mud	in	my
mouth	 when	 I	 said	 this,	 but	 I	 couldn’t	 escape	 from	 my
roots.	Even	our	address	was	borrowed.	“We	are	the	sons
of	Kaikesi	and	half–brothers	of	Kubera.	I	am	Ravana,	and
these	are	my	siblings,	Kumbakarna	and	Vibhishana.”
A	 small	 frown	 appeared	 on	 his	 old	 haggard	 face.	 There	 were	 deep
thought	lines	on	his	broad	forehead.	And	there	was	a	clear	chill	in	his	voice.
“Your	notoriety	precedes	you,	Ravana.	I	suspected	as	much.	My	informers	have
brought	 news	 about	 your	 misdeeds	 of	 the	 past	 few	 years.	 It	 is	 indeed
unfortunate	 that	 the	 Asura	 tribe	 produces	 such	 useless	 hotheads	 as	 you.	 You
call	yourself	a	warrior?	But	my	boys	were	tailing	you	for	the	past	eight	days.
They	could	have	slit	your	throat	many	times	over	in	the	last	week.	And	you	call
yourself	 a	 warrior!	 I	 think	 your	 mixed	 blood	 has	 got	 to	 do	 with	 this	 total
incompetence.	Stop	playing	a	buffoon	and	be	worthy	of	the	ambition	that	burns

in	your	heart.”
Anger	rose	in	me.	What	right	did	this	old	loser	have	to	tell	me	off?	Yet,	I
knew	he	was	right.	I	was	angry	because	it	was	true.	I	was	an	indifferent	student.
My	 mother	 wanted	 me	 to	 become	 a	 world-conquering	 warrior,	 but	 my	 noncaring	father	wanted	to	fill	my	head	with	Brahmin	‘learning’.	Could	we	afford
a	good	teacher?	Did	we	have	the	opportunity	to	learn	to	be	good	warriors?	I
had	 many	 reasons	 for	 not	 succeeding	 in	 life.	 I	 clenched	 my	 fist	 to	 keep	 my
temper	 from	 exploding.	 I	 left	 that	 mundane	 existence	 because	 I	 had	 the	 fiery
ambition	to	become	something.	I	saw	Kumbha	trying	to	untie	the	chords.	His
eyes	had	become	red	with	rage.
Then	I	understood.	The	Emperor	was	merely	testing	my	patience.	Perhaps
this	was	the	Guru	I	had	been	looking	for.	But	anger	still	simmered	within	me.	I
didn’t	 want	 to	 submit	 so	 easily.	 I	 could	 not	 be	 so	 easily	 tamed.	 I	 looked
scornfully	at	this	man	and	his	delusion	of	grandeur.	But	my	tongue	appeared	to
have	 dived	 deep	 into	 my	 stomach.	 I	 could	 not	 retort.	 Mahabali	 exuded	 raw
power.	 I	 was	 suddenly	 afraid.	 And	 then	 it	 dawned	 on	 me;	 this	 was	 a	 turning
point	 in	 my	 life.	 An	 array	 of	 emotions	 flashed	 through	 my	 mind	 and	 I	 stood
paralyzed	 before	 the	 Emperor,	 exposed	 and	 naked.	 I	 could	 feel	 his	 glance
taunting	me,	challenging	me,	soothing	me,	frightening	me.
“You	may	be	of	some	use	to	this	world	after	all.	Initially,	I	thought	of	you
as	 one	 of	 the	 dregs	 who	 populate	 the	 forgotten	 and	 forsaken	 Asura	 outposts
like	 pests;	 who	 dream	 of	 glory	 and	 do	 nothing;	 who	 revel	 in	 a	 past,	 real	 or
imagined	and	wish	for	a	miracle	to	save	themselves	and	their	race.	But	Ravana,
I	can	see	a	spark,	a	small	one	perhaps,	but	a	spark	indeed,	which	with	the	right
breeze	 can	 be	 blown	 into	 a	 raging	 fire.	 I	 do	 not	 know,	 whether	 you	 are	 the
promise	of	our	miserable	people	or	their	curse.	You	could	be	both	and	many
things	beyond.
Something	tells	this	old	man	that	you	have	a	grand	ambition	and	you	will
not	 stop	 anywhere	 until	 you	 achieve	 your	 dreams.	 You	 do	 not	 know	 what
power	you	have	suppressed	in	your	restless	and	aimless	mind.	A	small	speck
of	 hope	 is	 rising	 in	 me,	 that	 you,	 with	 proper	 training	 and	 guidance	 can
become	the	salvation	of	a	million	people	–	the	people	who	have	been	trampled
upon,	 who	 have	 been	 banished	 to	 the	 nether	 world	 of	 nothingness.	 The	 same
people	 who	 are	 being	 crushed	 under	 the	 foot	 of	 an	 unscrupulous	 enemy.
Ravana,	welcome	to	the	humble	abode	of	Mahabali.	Stay	as	long	as	you	want,
but	more	importantly,	learn.	Come	with	an	open	mind	and	remember	that	this
place	has	a	lot	to	teach	you.”

The	old	man	had	style.	Then	with	a	wave	of	his	hands	and	a	kind	smile,
the	 corners	 of	 his	 mouth	 twitching	 with	 a	 slight	 hint	 of	 a	 taunt,	 the	 Emperor
dismissed	us.
I	kept	thinking	about	Mahabali	as	we	followed	a	slightly	built	man	w	Ky
b1">ith	a	flowing	white	beard,	through	the	enormous	cave.	Mahabali’s	fall	was
ridiculous.	It	did	not	have	the	glory	and	heroism	associated	with	the	fall	of	the
other	great	Asura	empires	before	him.	The	great	Asura	empire	of	the	famous
twin	brothers	Hiranya	and	Hiranyaksha,	had	almost	achieved	supremacy	over
all	 India,	 when	 Hiranya	 was	 gored	 to	 death	 by	 a	 wild	 boar.	 Hiranyaksha	 was
betrayed	by	his	son	Prahalada,	who	had	conspired	with	Indra,	the	king	of	the
Devas.
Prahalada	was	a	weak	king	and	the	empire	soon	went	to	pieces.	He	ruined
the	country	with	heavy	taxes.	Farming	and	pasturing	were	ruined,	trade	guilds
migrated	and	art	died.	Meanwhile,	a	new	menace	had	entered	the	scene	–	a	mad
Brahmin	called	Parasurama	–	Rama	with	an	axe	to	grind,	who	formed	a	group
of	thugs	to	start	a	series	of	terror	raids	in	the	south.	Anarchy	and	arson	spread
and	 his	 thugs	 were	 dreaded	 across	 the	 country.	 They	 sneaked	 into	 palaces,
looted	 them,	 butchered	 the	 occupants	 and	 set	 fire	 to	 the	 city.	 Whenever
Parasurama	 conquered	 a	 land,	 he	 ensured	 that	 the	 Brahmins	 occupied	 the
highest	 posts.	 Erstwhile	 priests	 like	 the	 Malayans	 or	 Vannans,	 were	 banished
from	the	cities	to	the	villages.	Ineffectual	King	Prahalada	obtained	peace	from
Parsurama	at	a	great	and	humiliating	price	and	ensured	the	ascendancy	of	the
Brahmins	in	the	Asura	social	order.
A	change	took	place	when	Mahabali	ascended	the	throne	after	Prahalada
died.	 Indra	 could	 never	 have	 anticipated	 that	 Prahalada	 would	 have	 such	 a
grandson.	 Within	 a	 decade,	 Mahabali	 had	 overthrown	 the	 yoke	 of	 Indra’s
empire	and	in	a	few	years	he	had	conquered	the	entire	subcontinent.	This	was
before	 Karthiveerarjuna	 had	 reestablished	 the	 aborigine	 or	 Adi	 Dravida
empire	on	the	west	coast,	and	Bali,	the	mighty	Vanara	king,	was	even	born.	For
the	 next	 20	 years,	 Mahabali	 ruled	 with	 flourish	 and	 Asura	 art	 and	 music
reached	its	peak.	Great	cities	were	built	and	trade	exploded.	The	world	came	to
his	 doorstep.	 Oh	 the	 glories	 I	 have	 heard	 about	 those	 times!	 The	 old	 men	 of
our	villages	never	stopped	talking	about	those	days	–	days	that	I	believe	have
been	glorified	beyond	recognition.
Vibhishana	was	trying	to	make	conversation	with	the	old	man.	But	he	only
replied	in	grunts	and	snorts.	When	we	reached	a	corner,	the	old	man	abruptly
stopped	 and	 turned	 to	 us.	 “These	 are	 your	 sleeping	 quarters.	 Tomorrow	 we

will	start	the	lessons.”
Before	 we	 could	 thank	 him,	 he	 had	 left.	 We	 lay	 there	 thinking	 of	 our
future.	 I	 kept	 thinking	 of	 my	 mother	 and	 sister.	 I	 hoped	 a	 hurricane	 had	 not
blown	our	small	hut	over	the	cliff.	I	thought	of	my	miserable	childhood	when
even	the	old	and	stale	food	our	neighbours	gave	us	tasted	good	in	our	hungry
mouths.	 I	 thought	 of	 the	 day	 when	 all	 four	 of	 us	 became	 sick	 with	 stomach
aches	 after	 we	 ate	 like	 pigs	 in	 my	 half-brother ’s	 palace;	 our	 poor	 stomachs
unaccustomed	to	ghee	or	fruits	rebelled,	and	we	were	miserable	for	almost	a
week.
I	 thought	 of	 the	 opportunities	 lost	 by	 each	 poor,	 black,	 Asura	 child;	 the
poverty,	 the	 filth,	 the	 flies,	 the	 shattered	 childhoods,	 and	 a	 familiar	 numbing
pain	started	gnawing	my	soul.	My	father ’s	leering	face	jeered	at	me,	screaming
repeatedly	that	I	was	a	black	and	good-for-nothing	evil-spirited	loser	who	was
a	 burden	 to	 the	 world.	 I	 think	 of	 the	 nights	 when	 we	 spoke	 only	 about	 the
various	foods	and	delicacies	which	we	had	only	heard	about	but	never	seen.
My	 mother ’s	 sobs	 touched	 a	 soft	 spot	 somewhere	 inside	 me	 and	 I	 wept
for	our	misery,	the	struggles	that	lay	in	the	future,	our	shattered	hopes	of	the
past,	 our	 people	 and	 our	 tribe.	 I	 wept	 for	 our	 helplessness,	 frustrations	 and
broken	 lives.	 I	 even	 wept	 for	 the	 blackness	 of	 our	 skin.	 I	 sobbed	 for	 our
ignorance	and	the	cherished	nostalgia	about	the	imagined	glory	of	our	people.
Tears	 could	 neither	 wash	 the	 colours	 of	 our	 heroism	 in	 poverty	 nor	 the
foolhardy	resolve	of	our	people	to	die	for	a	cause.	Neither	could	it	wash	away
the	call	Kawalve	ofousness	of	people	like	my	half-brother,	who	was	insulated
from	 this	 world	 of	 emptiness.	 Then	 I	 wept	 for	 myself.	 Then,	 through	 the
darkness	that	covered	us	like	a	blanket,	two	pair	of	hands	embraced	me	from
either	side	–	the	tired	hands	of	my	brothers,	who	I	vowed	I	would	protect	with
my	 life,	 who	 I	 believed	 would	 die	 for	 me.	 We	 hugged	 each	 other	 and	 wept
together	for	all	the	miseries	we	had	faced.
Slowly	it	began	to	sink	in.	A	small	seed	of	hope	so	casually	thrown	by	the
old	 Emperor	 began	 to	 sprout.	 I	 hugged	 my	 brothers	 hard	 as	 I	 began	 to	 think
that	 my	 talk	 about	 conquering	 the	 world	 was	 not	 the	 empty	 daydreams	 of	 a
destitute	child.	Maybe	the	future	had	promise.	Tomorrow	was	another	day	and
a	new	beginning.

5	Dasamukha,	the	ten-faced
Ravana
The	old	man	with	the	flowing	beard	woke	us	at	dawn	and	marched	us	to	a
nearby	mountain	stream	to	do	our	morning	chores.	He	was	quite	loquacious	at
the	 moment	 as	 if	 he	 had	 suddenly	 discovered	 that	 he	 had	 a	 story	 to	 tell	 and
found	 in	 us	 a	 most	 willing	 audience.	 “People	 call	 me	 Brahma.	 That	 is	 my
family	 surname.	 Teaching	 runs	 in	 our	 blood,	 and	 we	 have	 been	 Gurus	 since
ancient	times.	There	were	four	Gurus	in	the	Council	of	Knowledge,	and	each
year,	 they	 decided	 the	 syllabus	 for	 hundreds	 of	 schools	 spread	 over	 various
parts	of	the	Asura	empire.	We	created	the	Asura	world	as	we	know	it	today.	My
family	 created	 the	 law	 and	 were	 worshipped	 as	 Gods.	 Along	 with	 Shiva’s
family;	who	right	from	the	time	of	the	great	empire	on	the	banks	of	the	Indus,
protected	farms,	property	and	animals,	and	were	called	the	Pasupathis	owing	to
their	function	in	the	society.	We	developed	a	civilization.”
He	rambled	on,	”Then	the	Deva	invasion	began.	The	first	act	of	Indra	was
to	 burn	 down	 our	 cities,	 schools,	 temples	 –	 everything	 that	 encouraged
progress.	 We	 had	 at	 that	 time,	 in	 collaboration	 with	 the	 architect	 and
engineering	 guild	 of	 the	 Mayans,	 achieved	 great	 progress	 in	 technology.	 We
had	 even	 developed	 a	 flying	 machine	 –	 the	 Pushpaka.	 However,	 only	 a
prototype	had	been	built.	The	invasion	changed	all	that.	The	head	of	the	family
and	 the	 fourth	 member	 in	 charge	 of	 science	 and	 technology,	 was	 among	 the
first	victims	of	the	marauding	barbarians	and	Asura	science	died	with	him.	The
head	of	the	Mayan	school	escaped	in	his	flying	machine	in	the	nick	of	the	time
and	 his	 successors	 are	 now	 protected	 by	 your	 half-brother,	 who	 has
appropriated	the	Pushpaka	flying	machine	prototype.	I	do	not	know	how	many
centuries	will	pass	before	man	masters	the	sky	again.
My	ancestors	specialized	in	arms	and	manufacture	of	military	equipment.

The	 Brahma	 family	 who	 specialized	 in	 arts,	 crafts	 and	 music	 are	 under	 the
protection	of	the	Gandharva	empire.	Bali,	the	great	Vanara	king,	protected	the
Brahma	 teachers	 of	 architecture	 and	 is	 building	 great	 cities	 in	 middle	 India.
The	 tribe	 of	 the	 fourth	 Brahma,	 who	 joined	 the	 Devas,	 specialized	 in
philosophical	discourses.	They	are	now	the	intellectual	gurus	to	the	Devas.	So,
even	 though	 I	 will	 be	 imparting	 knowledge	 in	 all	 possible	 branches,	 I	 shall
specifically	 concentrate	 on	 arms	 and	 military	 strategy.	 As	 warriors,	 I	 believe
that	is	the	most	crucial	knowledge	you	should	possess.”
He	 had	 our	 attention.	 We	 had	 a	 vague	 idea	 about	 the	 evolution	 of	 the
Brahma	clan	but	it	was	surprising	that	the	old	man	who	sat	cross-legged	before
us,	 was	 actually	 the	 bearer	 of	 such	 ancient	 wisdom.	 He	 hardly	 looked	 like	 a
great	 guru.	 He	 was	 rather	 plain,	 short	 and	 bald,	 with	 a	 pot	 belly.	 But	 the
flowing	 white	 beard	 and	 the	 twinkle	 in	 his	 eyes	 betrayed	 the	 genius	 hidden
beneath	that	old	and	worn	shell.
From	 that	 day,	 as	 the	 sun	 rose	 over	 the	 Sahyas	 and	 the	 majestic	 Poorna
river	 that	 wound	 its	 way	 through	 the	 green	 mountains	 turned	 purple,	 a	 new
epoch	began	in	our	lives.	Brahma	was	our	long-lost	father,	the	mother	we	left
behind,	our	Guru,	our	God,	our	saviour.	Knowledge	in	its	purest	form,	refined
by	scores	of	generations	of	knowledge-seekers	of	the	Brahma	family,	poured
from	 the	 old	 man.	 It	 engulfed	 and	 enthralled	 me.	 He	 taught	 us	 long-lost	 arts,
long-forgotten	 texts	 and	 more	 than	 anything	 else,	 planted	 in	 my	 fertile	 but
restless	soul,	the	quest	for	knowledge.	It	was	he	who	taught	me	to	listen	to	the
music	of	nature.	He	showed	me	how	to	listen	to	the	chirping	of	birds,	he	made
my	mind	dance	to	the	tune	of	the	flowing	wild	brooks,	he	made	my	inner	self
soar	with	the	eagle	flying	high	in	the	sky.	I	felt	cleansed.	If	I	owe	anything	to
anyone	in	my	life,	it	is	to	my	Guru.	He	gave	shape	to	my	ambition,	wings	to
my	dreams,	clarity	to	my	vision,	and	power	to	my	arms.
In	my	irresponsible	teenage,	I	would	dismiss	the	Vedas	and	Upanishads	as
humbug.	 But	 Mahabali	 and	 Brahma	 opened	 to	 me	 the	 magical	 world	 of	 the
sacred	 texts	 of	 the	 ancient	 Asuras	 and	 Devas.	 I	 stood	 astonished	 at	 the	 grand
philosophical	 speculations	 these	 books	 espoused.	 They	 were	 the	 works	 of
supreme	 intellectuals	 and	 men	 of	 genius.	 It	 was	 a	 far	 cry	 from	 the	 trivia	 that
people	like	my	father	were	propagating	in	the	name	of	Vedas.	The	rituals,	the
animal	 sacrifices,	 the	 curse	 of	 caste	 -	 none	 of	 these	 had	 the	 sanction	 of	 the
Vedas	nor	were	they	divine	proclamations	or	edicts.	By	the	time	Brahma	and
Mahabali	 had	 reached	 the	 commentary	 on	 the	 Atharva	 Veda,	 I	 was	 confident
that	I	could	challenge	any	pseudo	scholars	on	the	Vedas.	The	real	meaning	of

the	sacred	texts	gave	me	greater	determination	to	attack	evils	like	caste,	animal
sacrifices	 and	 other	 rituals	 being	 propagated	 by	 the	 priestly	 class.	 I	 was
determined	 to	 curb	 meaningless	 rituals	 and	 sacrifices	 and	 put	 an	 end	 to	 the
curse	of	caste.
We	had	nearly	reached	the	end	of	our	education.	The	last	few	classes	were
with	 the	 great	 Emperor	 himself.	 He	 spoke	 in	 length	 about	 mind	 control	 and
mastering	the	senses.	The	path	he	proposed	was	rigid	and	straight.	It	was	tough,
challenging	and	totally	impractical.
“Anger	is	the	lowest	emotion.	It	clouds	the	intellect	and	can	make	you	do
foolish	 things.	 You	 become	 blind	 to	 reason	 and	 react	 only	 with	 your	 body,
without	 thinking.	 This	 leads	 to	 failure	 in	 every	 sphere.	 Uproot	 this	 evil	 from
your	system.
The	 next	 base	 emotion	 is	 Pride.	 Arrogance	 stems	 from	 pride	 and	 kills
clear	 thinking	 and	 vision.	 Pride	 makes	 you	 underestimate	 your	 foes	 and
overestimate	yourself.	Jealousy	is	a	vile	emotion,	and	mastering	it	is	one	of	the
most	challenging	tasks	a	human	being	has.	Jealousy	makes	you	pine	for	other
man’s	kingdom,	wealth,	wife	and	fame.	This	emotion	has	lead	to	many	wars,
bloodshed	and	tears	since	time	immemorial.
Happiness	 and	 sadness	 are	 just	 two	 eternal	 truths	 like	 day	 and	 night.	 A
man	of	superior	intellect	is	never	affected	by	these	emotions.	They	are	not	base
emotions	at	all	but	a	reflection	of	our	thoughts,	a	reaction	to	our	perspective
on	things	we	see,	hear	and	do.	Equanimity	is	not	only	desirable	in	a	warrior,
but	a	must.	Without	it,	you	are	as	good	as	dead	in	the	battlefield.
Fear	 is	 not	 an	 emotion,	 it	 is	 a	 disease.	 It	 spreads	 from	 the	 leader	 to	 his
followers	and	vice–versa.	Nothing	has	killed	more	men	in	war	than	fear.	What
should	a	warrior	fear?	Death?	But	death	is	what	everyone	achieves	ultimately.
Is	it	wounds	that	you	fear?	What	is	more	important?	A	pint	of	your	blood	or
the	nectar	of	victory?	Think.	Thinking	will	clear	such	doubts.
Nothing	 is	 more	 condemnable	 than	 selfishness.	 A	 man	 who	 thinks	 of
himself	 alone	 is	 the	 most	 unlucky	 person	 of	 all.	 Why	 is	 one	 born?	 Is	 it	 t
SborNoto	 get	 fed	 and	 grow	 fat?	 Is	 to	 procreate	 and	 multiply	 like	 pigs?	 Is	 to
defile	 this	 good	 earth	 with	 bodily	 wastes	 and	 then	 die	 without	 creating	 any
ripples	in	the	world?	What	is	his	life	worth	if	it	does	not	light	at	least	a	small
light	 in	 the	 darkness	 that	 is	 crushing	 our	 people.	 Ravana,	 abhor	 this	 vile
emotion	of	selfishness.
Love	 is	 a	 chain	 that	 ties	 you	 to	 the	 millstone	 of	 make-belief.	 A	 warrior
should	focus	on	victory	and	victory	alone.	That	should	be	your	only	Dharma.

Do	 your	 duty	 to	 your	 people,	 parents,	 wives,	 sisters,	 brothers	 and	 Gods,	 but
never	 ever	 love	 them.	 Love	 makes	 you	 weak.	 Love	 has	 unseen	 bondages	 that
take	 you	 into	 the	 abyss	 of	 failure	 at	 that	 crucial	 moment	 when	 victory	 and
failure	get	balanced.	Beware	of	love.
Finally,	 control	 your	 ambition.	 Ravana,	 I	 can	 see	 the	 fiery	 ambition
burning	in	your	eyes.	But	do	not	be	reckless.	Take	only	what	life	offers	you	as
your	 own.	 Let	 your	 life	 follow	 its	 own	 tide.	 Aim	 for	 things	 and	 strive	 to
achieve	them,	but	always	keep	your	feet	solidly	on	the	ground.	Think,	think	and
think,	before	you	act.
The	 only	 thing	 worth	 preserving	 is	 your	 mind.	 Your	 mind	 absorbs	 the
knowledge	you	gain	from	your	Gurus,	your	books	and	your	life,	and	refines	it
to	great	wisdom.	It	is	what	you	have	to	develop.	Every	living	minute	you	have
to	strive	to	feed	your	mind	with	fresh	and	positive	inputs.	This	will	give	clarity
to	 your	 vision	 and	 immense	 power	 to	 your	 action.	 You	 will	 make	 fewer
mistakes	and	also	learn	faster	from	them.
Ravana,	 you	 have	 a	 great	 destiny	 before	 you.	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 anyone
who	 can	 mend	 my	 broken	 dreams.	 Never	 before	 have	 the	 poor	 Asuras	 had
someone	 so	 suitable	 to	 lead	 them	 to	 victory	 and	 eternal	 glory.	 Ravana,	 lead
them	with	wisdom	and	empathy.	You	can	give	them	back	their	lost	empire	and
redeem	 their	 forgotten	 civilization,	 you	 can	 colour	 their	 aspirations	 and	 fire
their	 imagination.	 I	 can	 visualize	 you	 flying	 atop	 a	 fiery	 horse,	 your	 sword
outstretched,	 your	 thick	 black	 mane	 flying	 in	 the	 gusty	 wind,	 leading	 the
bravest	Asura	warriors	to	charge	upon	Deva	forces.	I	can	see	the	Deva	cities
crumbling.	 Yes,	 I	 can	 hear	 the	 distant	 tremors	 of	 a	 coming	 storm.	 They	 are
faint	now,	but	the	power	they	are	 going	to	unleash	on	this	holy	land	of	India
will	 be	 tremendous.	 They	 will	 uproot	 the	 current	 system,	 demolish	 a	 million
myths	 and	 rewrite	 history.	 Ravana,	 I	 believe,	 the	 world	 will	 be	 yours,	 unless
you	 forget	 the	 ten	 lessons	 I	 have	 just	 mentioned.	 I	 believe	 Brahma	 has	 done
enough	 for	 you	 to	 shed	 the	 nine	 thinking	 heads	 from	 you.	 Only	 the	 most
important	 one,	 the	 mind,	 remains.	 The	 education	 you	 received	 is	 the	 ultimate
sacrifice,	your	tapsya.	You	are	now	refined	intelligence	in	its	purest	form.	And
with	clear	logic	and	action,	you	will	lead	the	Asuras	to	regain	their	past	glory.
Go	Ravana,	and	own	the	world!”
Was	it	the	foolishness	of	youth	or	an	inner	urge	to	speak	my	heart	which
prompted	me	to	contradict	the	great	Emperor?	I	have	yet	to	figure	it	out.	But
even	now,	as	I	am	being	eaten	alive	by	rats	and	jackals,	I	believe	the	things	I
told	him	then.	I	can	still	see	the	look	of	astonishment,	then	anger,	then	infinite

and	indescribable	sadness,	which	played	upon	the	old	face.	It	hurts	me	to	even
think	of	it,	but	my	youth	gave	me	the	impudence	to	press	on.
“Your	highness,	these	are	noble	thoughts,	but	what	you	are	demanding	is
impossible.	I	am	sorry	to	say	this,	but	is	the	shedding	of	the	nine	emotions	or
nine	 thinking	 heads	 as	 you	 call	 them,	 which	 I	 need	 to	 shed	 for	 the	 sake	 of
success,	practical?	I	am	a	good	student	and	I	have	learnt	my	lessons	well	but	I
shall	 always	 have	 my	 own	 opinion	 about	 things.	 Do	 not	 think	 that	 I	 am
arrogant.	Please	hear	me	out.
You	 were	 talking	 about	 anger,	 your	 Highness.	 I	 agree,	 that	 misdirected
anger	can	cause	harm.	But	is	it	not	a	basic	emotion	of	life?	If	I	do	not	get	angry
at	 the	 plight	 of	 the	 Asura	 tribe,	 that	 once-mighty	 race	 which	 Sy	 rut	 built	 the
greatest	civilization	the	earth	has	known	till	now,	how	can	I	claim	to	be	one	of
its	worthy	sons?	Can’t	I	be	furious	when	thousands	live	in	inhuman	conditions
under	 the	 yoke	 of	 Deva	 kings	 and	 their	 vassal	 Asura	 fiends?	 If	 I	 cannot	 feel
frustration	 about	 the	 forgotten	 Asura	 arts,	 demolished	 Asura	 religion,
pulverized	Asura	temples,	destroyed	Asura	kingdoms,	and	cowering	cowards
who	 drag	 themselves	 on	 all	 fours	 in	 front	 of	 Deva	 kings	 and	 petty	 nobles
claiming	to	represent	Asura	interests,	tell	me	sir,	what	emotion	should	I	feel?	Is
it	not	anger	that	will	electrify	my	thoughts	and	push	me	into	positive	action?	I
am	sorry	sir,	but	I	will	never	lose	this	emotional	head	–	the	head	of	anger.
Why	should	pride	and	vanity	be	held	in	contempt?	I	feel	proud	about	my
people,	 our	 race,	 our	 culture,	 language	 art	 and	 music.	 I	 feel	 proud	 about
myself	for	having	immense	energy	and	the	will	to	succeed.	I	do	not	believe	that
a	person	should	always	be	meek,	beg	for	food	or	live	in	eternal	poverty	and	all
the	stuff	which	Brahmins	preach	but	not	a	single	one	ever	practises.
If	I	struggle	hard	in	my	life	to	achieve	success,	I	have	every	right	to	be
proud	of	it,	I	have	every	right	to	bask	in	vanity	and	luxury.	Why	did	the	kings
of	the	past	build	great	temples	and	cities?	Why	did	the	nobles	donate	towards
charity	 and	 religion?	 Is	 it	 not	 to	 exhibit	 their	 vanity	 and	 pride?	 Most	 humble
men	 are	 either	 hypocrites	 or	 have	 much	 to	 be	 humble	 about.	 Success	 breeds
pride	and	vanity.	And	pride	is	the	only	reward	of	success.
Jealousy	is	the	biggest	force	that	motivates	humankind.	Why	do	empires
compete	with	each	other?	Why	do	kings	try	to	outsmart	each	other	in	what	they
do,	if	not	motivated	by	the	jealousy	they	feel?	Jealousy	is	the	driving	force	of
progress,	envy	is	the	motivating	force	of	life.	The	need	for	importance	is	the
most	important	of	urges	after	the	basic	physical	urges	of	food,	shelter	and	sex.
Even	these	basic	urges	have	their	root	in	jealousy.	To	deny	jealousy	is	to	deny

the	basic	instincts	of	man.	Sorry	sir,	but	what	you	are	asking	is	impractical.
You	talk	about	equanimity	in	sadness	and	happiness.	Is	this	possible	ever?
When	my	beloved	ones	depart	from	this	world,	should	I	remain	calm?	Should	I
deny	 myself	 the	 consolation	 of	 crying?	 If	 I	 become	 incapable	 of	 feeling
happiness,	what	shall	become	of	me?	If	I	do	not	find	happiness	in	the	beauty	of
the	rising	sun,	if	I	cannot	feel	ecstasy	in	the	smile	of	a	little	baby,	if	I	cannot
lose	myself	in	the	happiness	of	music,	is	life	worth	living?	Fear	is	the	greatest
instinct	of	man	and	beast,	and	you	ask	me	to	ignore	it.	Sir,	I	am	not	afraid	to
say	that	I	am	scared.	I	am	frightened	of	many	things.	I	am	no	coward	but	fear
sleeps	somewhere	in	my	heart.	I	am	afraid	of	death	and	the	people	who	claim
they	are	not	afraid	of	death.	They	are	either	foolish	and	will	drag	others	down
with	them	also,	or	they	are	evil	men	who	hate	everybody.
I	 am	 afraid	 of	 losing	 many	 things,	 worthless	 though	 they	 may	 be,	 but	 I
would	 have	 gained	 them	 through	 my	 sweat	 and	 blood.	 I	 am	 afraid	 that	 my
loved	ones	may	fall	prey	to	disease.	I	am	afraid	that	some	battles	might	claim
my	faithful	brothers.	Strong	rain	can	wash	away	my	sister	and	mother	into	the
waiting	ocean.	I	am	aware	with	every	breath	I	take	that	I	take	steps	towards	my
death.	But	I	do	not	fear	fear	so	much	as	to	deny	its	very	existence.	It	is	this	fear
that	helps	me	remain	prepared	for	dangers	that	I	must	face.	It	is	fear	that	makes
me	 understand	 that	 there	 are	 things	 that	 I	 cannot	 control	 and	 helps	 me	 to
understand	God	and	myself.
You	 call	 selfishness	 a	 base	 emotion.	 But	 it	 is	 this	 trait	 which	 has	 built
great	 cities	 around	 the	 world	 and	 the	 very	 foundation	 of	 ambition.	 Without	 a
highly	centered	ego	and	the	desire	to	achieve	the	treasures	of	this	world,	would
one	succeed	in	life?	When	I	see	a	lovely	girl,	a	fascinating	place,	a	charming
village,	 a	 sparkling	 diamond,	 a	 prosperous	 S	 a	 fascina	 country,	 ambition
flutters	in	my	soul.	I	want	the	charms	of	this	world	to	be	mine	and	mine	alone.
You	may	try	to	kill	my	base	thoughts,	but	my	King,	pardon	my	impudence	and
tell	 me	 in	 all	 honesty,	 was	 it	 not	 from	 the	 same	 selfishness	 that	 you	 built	 an
empire?	You	did	not	become	a	mendicant,	but	strived	to	become	the	Emperor
of	the	whole	world.	If	it	was	not	for	this	base	instinct	of	selfishness,	why	did
you	slay	thousands	in	war?	Why	did	you	lead	your	mighty	armies	against	the
Devas?	You	had	one	aim	only,	you	wanted	glory	for	yourself,	your	clan,	your
tribe	 –	 whichever	 way	 one	 looks	 at	 it,	 the	 word	 you	 is	 prominent.	 I	 want	 to
achieve	 whatever	 you	 achieved	 and	 much	 more.	 I	 am	 willing	 to	 risk	 being
known	 as	 the	 most	 selfish	 man	 in	 the	 world,	 rather	 than	 dying	 unknown	 as	 a
selfless	non-entity.”

The	old	man	sat	there	with	fire	in	his	eyes.	I	felt	myself	cowering.	But,	as
I	had	started,	I	did	not	want	to	leave	things	unsaid.	I	collected	my	thoughts	and
pressed	 on,	 “It’s	 pity	 that	 you	 and	 Brahma	 look	 down	 on	 love	 as	 a	 base
emotion.	 Without	 love,	 without	 the	 king	 of	 emotions,	 nothing	 exists.	 There’s
nothing	more	pure	than	the	love	of	a	mother	for	her	baby.	If	one	has	not	felt
the	painful	need	to	be	with	one’s	lover,	if	you	do	not	feel	the	love	for	your	own
brothers,	sisters,	your	father	who	made	you,	your	mother	who	carried	you	in
her	womb	and	raised	you	with	her	blood	and	milk,	for	friends	and	those	little
cherished	moments	of	togetherness,	your	wife	for	sharing	your	life	with	you
and	 for	 your	 children	 for	 carrying	 your	 life	 forward,	 then	 is	 this	 life	 worth
living?	Is	it	not	love	for	your	country,	tribe,	language,	religion,	Gods,	and	so
many	other	things,	which	may	seem	trivial	but	which	are	so	preciously	held	in
the	 bosom	 of	 men,	 that	 has	 led	 to	 so	 much	 bloodshed	 and	 war?	 People	 have
died	for	love	in	the	past	and	will	continue	to	do	so	as	long	as	the	world	exists.	I
shall	always	love	the	things	I	have	told	you	about.	But	yes,	I	shall	love	myself
above	them	all.	Without	me,	nothing	which	is	lovable	has	any	meaning	to	me.	I
love	because	I	exist	and	I	exist	because	I	love	–	I	love	myself.
Ambition	 is	 the	 key	 to	 progress.	 Without	 ambition,	 the	 kings	 of	 Egypt
would	 not	 be	 so	 busy	 building	 those	 pyramids	 right	 now.	 Without	 ambition,
men	 would	 have	 remained	 hunters.	 There	 would	 not	 have	 been	 wheels,
horsecarts	 or	 chariots,	 magnificent	 cities,	 temples	 and	 palaces,	 nor	 majestic
sailing	 ships.	 Without	 ambition,	 we	 would	 not	 have	 had	 a	 Mahabali	 or	 Indra.
Ambition	is	the	horse	that	pulls	our	lives	forward.
The	 amazing	 speed	 of	 progress	 man	 has	 achieved	 in	 the	 past	 few	 years
would	 have	 not	 been	 achieved	 without	 that	 small	 flame	 of	 ambition	 in	 the
minds	 of	 a	 few	 men,	 which	 was	 fanned	 to	 become	 a	 huge	 fire	 by	 the	 other
emotions	 you	 have	 urged	 me	 to	 shun.	 Pride	 in	 one’s	 capability	 gave	 men	 the
confidence	 and	 ambition	 to	 grow;	 jealousy	 that	 someone	 else	 would	 achieve
more	prodded	him	to	work	hard	and	more	efficiently;	the	quest	for	happiness
resulted	 in	 ever-expanding	 ambition;	 the	 fear	 of	 sadness	 kept	 him	 awake	 at
night	and	pushed	him	further;	the	fear	of	failure	made	him	more	careful	and
God-fearing;	selfishness	glued	his	family,	city,	clan,	tribe	and	country	together
and	made	him	strive	even	harder.	Love	for	life	and	the	things	which	made	life
precious,	 made	 him	 protect	 his	 achievements.	 and	 I	 am	 sure	 an	 undying
ambition	for	more	will	lead	mankind	to	progress.	Progress,	which	we	cannot
even	imagine,	can	never	understand	in	our	short	lifetime.
My	beloved	Emperor,	please	do	not	feel	sorrow	if	I	speak	my	heart.	You

were	talking	about	intelligence	being	the	only	head	worth	having.	I	agree	it	is
important.	 But	 history	 teaches	 us	 that	 without	 any	 of	 the	 other	 emotions,	 it	 is
just	an	empty	skeleton.	There	is	no	life	in	it.	Sir,	it	was	not	the	maharishis	or
sages	who	built	civilizations	but	extraordinary	men,	who	never	controlled	their
emotions,	b	Sr	eifeut	let	them	flow	in	the	direction	which	nature	intended.	No
mendicant	 living	 in	 a	 forest	 ever	 conceived	 a	 great	 city,	 no	 sage	 was
determined	to	built	the	great	temples,	no	Brahmin	desired	to	built	great	ships
for	commerce	and	trade.	These	were	built	by	men	who	had	pride	in	their	veins,
anger	in	their	minds,	who	cried	when	they	felt	sad	and	laughed	when	they	were
happy,	who	were	frightened	when	confronted	by	forces	or	events	bigger	than
themselves,	 but	 strove	 forward	 with	 determination	 and	 a	 selfish	 love	 for	 all
that	 they	 cherished.	 They	 constantly	 kept	 raising	 their	 levels	 of	 ambition.
Intelligence	 is	 just	 a	 tool	 to	 serve	 our	 emotions	 and	 I	 want	 to	 live	 as	 God
intended	man	to	live.
My	aim	is	neither	become	God	nor	achieve	moksha.	At	best	I	think,	those
are	old	wives	tales.	I	do	not	believe	in	a	heaven	where	you	will	be	given	all	that
you	 purposefully	 denied	 yourself	 in	 this	 world.	 I	 do	 not	 believe	 in	 rebirth,
when	I	will	be	born	as	a	Brahmin	if	I	do	good	deeds	in	this	life	–	good	in	the
way	 the	 Brahmins	 describe.	 If	 being	 born	 a	 Brahmin	 is	 the	 ultimate	 reward,
then	I	may	even	refuse	to	die	for	fear	of	being	reborn.
I	am	sad	to	disappoint	you,	but	I	shall	live	like	a	man	and	die	as	one.	I	will
never	 try	 to	 be	 a	 God.	 I	 will	 live	 exactly	 as	 my	 emotions	 tell	 me	 to.	 I	 do	 not
want	to	be	a	model	man	for	future	generations	to	follow.	My	life	begins	with
me	and	ends	with	me.	But	I	will	live	my	life	to	its	full	and	die	as	a	man	should.
So	 borrowing	 from	 your	 words,	 I	 shall	 be	 a	 man	 with	 ten	 faces	 –	 I	 am
Dasamukha.”
A	 thick	 silence	 followed.	 Brahma	 stood	 staring	 at	 his	 bare	 toes	 and	 the
shrunken	 Emperor ’s	 fiery	 eyes	 bored	 through	 me.	 I	 found	 a	 sudden	 energy
flowing	in	my	veins.	Until	I	delivered	my	long	speech,	I	was	not	myself	sure	of
my	life’s	philosophy.	Until	then	I	had	wondered	if	I	was	betraying	the	trust	the
great	old	man	had	placed	upon	me.	But	suddenly	I	found	I	was	looking	at	him
with	 a	 new	 pair	 of	 eyes.	 He	 was	 shrinking	 fast	 in	 my	 estimate.	 He	 was	 just	 a
shrunken,	beaten,	half-dead	old	man	who	had	a	pretentious	air	about	him,	as	if
he	was	still	ruling	the	country.	He	was	just	a	mountain	rat,	hiding	from	Deva
forces	and	fighting	his	own	puppy	war	in	his	backyard.
The	voice	I	heard	then	was	a	weak	murmur.	He	tried	to	rise	himself	but
crumbled	 before	 me.	 I	 watched	 in	 horror.	 The	 pale	 figure	 slowly	 rose	 to	 his

knees.	 With	 glassy	 eyes,	 he	 stared	 past	 me	 and	 then	 quite	 melodramatically
raised	his	head	and	stared.	I	had	no	time	for	an	old	man’s	ramblings.	I	turned
my	 back	 and	 with	 a	 deliberate	 toss	 of	 my	 head,	 walked	 out	 with	 my	 brothers
following	 me.	 Vibhishana,	 with	 faltering	 steps,	 turned	 back	 many	 times
towards	the	old	man	who	had	now	raised	both	his	hands	towards	the	sky	and
was	rambling.	But	Kumbakarna	followed	me	with	steps	more	determined	than
my	 own	 and	 a	 smile	 on	 his	 lips.	 A	 motley	 crowd	 of	 Mahabali’s	 warriors
followed	me,	their	swords	and	shields	clattering	as	they	walked.
I	 stepped	 out	 into	 the	 blazing	 sun	 with	 my	 band	 of	 followers.	 The	 earth
was	fresh	from	a	recent	shower,	as	if	the	Creator	had	just	finished	his	work	and
gone	to	bathe.	I	inhaled	the	smell	of	the	forest	blooms	and	wet,	red	earth.	The
chirping	of	birds	was	music	to	my	ears.	The	world	lay	with	wide	open	arms,
inviting	me	to	join	in	this	exhilarating	journey	of	life.	As	I	took	my	first	step,	I
heard	a	sharp-pitched	wail	from	the	cave	I	had	left	behind.	My	spine	chilled	but
I	walked	on,	trying	hard	to	close	my	ears	to	the	old	man’s	soul-piercing	wail
that	rose	from	the	depths	of	that	stinking	cave.	“What	have	I	unleashed?!”	the
crazy	old	man	kept	wailing.	I	soon	shut	out	the	miserable	sounds	and	the	world
the	old	man	represented,	from	my	mind.	I	forgot	about	it	for	a	long	time	until
it	came	back	to	haunt	me	in	my	sleep.	But	that	was	later,	much	later.	I	am	now
running	ahead	of	myself.

6	Devil’s	raid
Bhadra
I	had	been	fighting	this	fool’s	war	for	the	last	few	years.	I	fought	under
Mahabali	 for	 six	 years,	 then	 tried	 to	 form	 my	 own	 group	 and	 failed.	 Then	 I
fought	under	Sumali.	I	was	neither	a	great	fighter,	nor	a	great	organizer.	Short,
plump,	with	soft	hands,	I	am	just	an	ordinary	man.	Just	like	a	vegetable	vendor,
the	 bullock	 cart	 man,	 peddler	 in	 the	 market,	 or	 even	 the	 washerman.	 I	 am	 a
nobody.	I	do	not	have	a	steely	glare	and	arching	brows.	My	nose	is	not	hooked
and	my	lips	do	not	draw	a	determined,	straight	line.	I	do	not	have	high	cheek
bones	 or	 a	 cleft	 chin.	 I	 had	 another	 name	 earlier	 in	 my	 life,	 but	 now	 I	 am
known	only	as	Bhadra.
I	never	had	large	ambitions.	I	looked	after	my	farm	on	the	banks	of	the
river	Poorna.	It	had	some	pepper	vines,	a	few	coconut	palms	and	two	cows.	I
was	happy	with	my	wife	and	a	lively	three-year-old	daughter.	My	village	was
small	 but	 it	 had	 everything	 –	 the	 sacred	 grove,	 a	 small	 shrine	 for	 Shiva,	 a
toddy	 shop	 and	 a	 small	 school,	 where	 basic	 crafts	 like	 masonry,	 farming,
mathematics	and	other	necessary	subjects	were	taught.	There	was	also	a	house
of	 pleasure,	 a	 quack	 who	 called	 himself	 a	 doctor,	 a	 priest	 to	 fleece	 us,	 and	 a
public	 bath	 where	we	bathed	 along	with	our	buffaloes.	I	lived	like	my	father,
who	had	lived	like	his	father.	My	children	would	also	live	like	me,	growing	up
in	 the	 same	 street,	 bathing	 in	 the	 same	 pond,	 falling	 in	 love	 with	 the	 dusky
beauties	of	the	village,	marrying,	procreating	and	dying	quietly,	mourned	by	a
few	and	not	in	the	least	missed	by	the	world.
My	 life	 would	 have	 gone	 on	 like	 that,	 without	 any	 punctuations,	 to	 end
simply	with	a	full	stop.	But	the	arrival	of	the	Devas	changed	everything.	We	did
not	 know	 who	 these	 creatures	 were	 until	 they	 came	 and	 knocked	 us	 down.	 I
remember	 those	 days	 with	 horror.	 We	 heard	 the	 rumblings	 of	 distant	 war
through	 the	 occasional	 traders	 who	 came	 to	 collect	 pepper	 from	 our	 farms.
They	spoke	about	how	the	Deva	forces	were	grouping	under	Vishnu,	the	chief

Deva,	 and	 how	 Mahabali	 was	 bracing	 for	 war.	 We	 ignored	 these	 rumours.
These	were	unimportant	things	and	happened	to	someone	else	in	far-off	places.
Kings	fought	wars	and	won	or	lost	their	kingdoms	and	their	lives.	We	were	the
lesser	 mortals	 and	 cared	 nothing	 about	 the	 dirty	 world	 of	 politics.	 I	 believed
that	Mahabali	was	invincible.	He	was	thought	to	be	just	and	tried	to	rule	with
his	subjects	in	mind.	Atleast	that	is	what	the	village	elders	told	us	and	we	had
no	reason	to	disbelieve	them.	We	continued	to	live	the	same	way	no	matter	who
ruled	in	the	distant	capital.	So	long	as	they	did	not	bother	us,	we	would	always
say	they	were	good	rulers.
On	a	dusty	evening,	when	we	were	returning	from	work	on	our	farms,	a
messenger	appeared	on	horseback.	He	was	a	tall	fellow	with	smallpox	marks
covering	his	face	and	a	strange	expression	in	his	eyes.	He	asked	us	to	demolish
our	Shiva	shrine	and	surrender	to	Vishnu.	He	was	treated	well	by	the	villagers,
but	 sent	 back	 with	 a	 warning	 that	 he	 should	 not	 invite	 the	 wrath	 of	 Shiva.	 In
fact,	 the	 messenger	 went	 into	 the	 Shiva	 shrine	 and	 offered	 prayers	 before
leaving.	The	whole	day,	we	spoke	about	the	Devas.	Some	said	the	Emperor	had
already	 fallen	 and	 fled	 underground,	 and	 that	 Vishnu	 had	 become	 our	 new
Emperor.	 They	 claimed	 that	 the	 messenger	 was	 proof	 of	 their	 theory.	 Others
said	that	Mahabali	had	moved	over	to	the	Deva	clan	and	was	rapidly	converting
all	the	Shiva	temples	to	Vishnu	temples.	There	was	a	row	in	the	toddy	shop	and
my	friend	got	punched	on	his	nose	by	an	angry	Shiva	fanatic.	I	was	happy	that
there	 was	 finally	 some	 activity	 in	 my	 quiet	 village.	 Usually	 nothing	 exciting
ever	happened	here	and	one	new	day	was	as	dull	as	the	next.
That	is,	until	the	night	I	was	woken	by	my	wife.	I	was	angry	[.	Ize="-	to	be
rudely	 shaken	 from	 my	 sleep	 and	 wanted	 to	 thrash	 her	 for	 her	 impudence.
Then	I	saw	that	there	were	strangers	inside	our	bedroom.	My	first	thought	was,
which	I	vividly	remember	even	now;	‘Oh	god!	What	will	I	give	these	people	to
eat?	They	have	come	after	dinner	time.’	Then	anger	came.	How	dare	they	break
into	 my	 bedroom?	 Slowly,	 fear	 crept	 on	 me.	 Who	 were	 these	 people?	 Why
were	 they	 here?	 My	 neighbour,	 that	 idiot	 who	 spat	 red	 betel	 juice	 into	 my
courtyard	every	day	and	enjoyed	the	fights	that	followed,	was	being	burnt	alive
and	brightly	lighting	up	his	front	yard.	In	that	ghastly	light	I	also	saw	an	orgy
taking	 place	 in	 my	 neighbour ’s	 yard.	 The	 cuckold	 whose	 wife	 flirted	 with
every	male	in	the	village,	was	getting	it	from	more	than	six	persons	at	the	same
time.	 But	 she	 was	 screaming.	 The	 Deva	 warriors	 had	 taken	 our	 village.	 The
whole	village	was	burning.	People	were	running	about	like	scared	chickens.	I
saw	 people	 being	 hacked.	 Houses	 were	 ablaze.	 Warriors	 on	 horseback	 with

their	fair,	devilish	faces,	were	jeering,	howling	and	killing	people.
The	strangers	were	leering	at	my	wife	now	and	I	could	feel	her	trembling.
I	scrambled	up	and	threw	my	arms	protectively	around	my	family.	The	devils
howled	with	laughter.	Then	I	heard	the	crackling	sound	of	fire	as	it	ate	through
my	hay	roof.	Someone	hit	me	with	the	hilt	of	his	sword.	The	bridge	of	my	nose
cracked	and	searing	pain	shot	through	my	body.	A	boy,	barely	fifteen	perhaps,
lifted	 my	 daughter	 by	 her	 legs,	 swung	 her	 like	 a	 rag	 and	 smashed	 her	 hard
against	a	mud	wall.	I	heard	my	beloved	daughter ’s	skull	crack	open.	Her	blood
and	brains	splattered	across	our	faces.	The	devils	laughed	again.	I	went	numb
and	 collapsed	 onto	 the	 floor.	 My	 wife	 fainted.	 I	 desperately	 tried	 to	 grab	 my
wife	as	they	dragged	her	away	into	the	darkness.	My	fingernails	scratched	lines
of	blood	on	her	arm,	but	she	slipped	away.	I	tried	to	stand	up.	There	was	blood
everywhere.	 I	 slipped	 in	 the	 blood	 and	 my	 hands	 touched	 my	 daughter ’s
shattered	 head.	 I	 shuddered.	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to	 look.	 I	 had	 to	 find	 a	 weapon.
Anything	that	I	could	use	to	smash	the	skulls	of	these	bastards.	Somehow,	I	had
to	save	my	wife.
My	 wife’s	 shrill	 screams	 got	 lost	 among	 many	 similar	 cries	 rising	 all
over	 the	 village.	 I	 walked,	 even	 as	 my	 strength	 oozed	 out	 of	 me	 and	 tried	 to
grab	 a	 pillar	 of	 the	 verandah.	 It	 was	 solid	 bamboo	 but	 with	 dismay	 I	 found	 I
could	 not	 lift	 it,	 let	 alone	 use	 it	 as	 a	 club.	 I	 jumped	 on	 the	 swine	 who	 were
raping	my	wife.	Bare	handed,	I	fought	tooth	and	nail,	but	I	was	no	match	for
the	 mighty	 Deva	 warriors.	 I	 was	 down	 in	 a	 second	 and	 they	 started	 punching
me.	Solid	wooden	shoes	kicked	my	face	and	I	was	dragged	in	the	mud.	Blows
rained	 upon	 me.	 Mercifully,	 one	 bastard	 plunged	 his	 sword	 deep	 into	 my
abdomen	and	all	I	knew	then	was	darkness.
When	I	awoke,	it	was	still	dark.	There	were	flames	everywhere	but	they
were	slowly	dying	out.	I	could	hear	the	distant	howls	of	jackals.	Another	day
has	dawned,	I	thought	hazily,	and	I	have	to	go	and	milk	the	cows.	But	I	just	lay
there.	The	earth	was	so	cozy,	cool	and	comforting.	Then	slowly,	very	slowly,
reality	 crept	 in	 and	 I	 sat	 up	 with	 a	 jerk.	 Needles	 of	 pain	 pierced	 parts	 of	 my
body	 which	 I	 didn’t	 know	 existed.	 My	 eyes	 were	 welded	 together,	 caked	 with
blood.	I	struggled	to	open	them.	Then	I	saw	some	Deva	bastards	sitting	under	a
tree,	getting	drunk.
All	 around,	 my	 village	 and	 my	 entire	 life,	 lay	 shattered.	 I	 tried	 to	 stand
and	 might	 have	 broken	 a	 twig	 in	 the	 effort.	 The	 noise	 sounded	 like	 a	 bolt	 of
thunder	 to	 my	 ears.	 The	 ghostly	 figures	 looked	 back.	 I	 sat	 without	 moving.
‘They	know	I	am	alive	and	they	are	going	to	kill	me,’	I	thought.	For	a	moment

I	was	relieved	the	Devas	decided	not	to	investigate.	Then	I	saw	him.	A	dark,	tall
figure	was	walking	towards	me,	his	sword	drawn.	I	panicked.	As	he	came	near,
I	saw	that	it	was	the	same	boy	who	had	splattered	my	girl	all	over	the	wall.	He
was	drunk	and	wobbled	on	unsure	legs.	I	waited,	m	[.	I	wally	hands	searching
for	 anything	 I	 could	 use	 as	 weapon.	 The	 boy	 stood	 near	 my	 head,	 swaying	 a
little.	Someone	called	out	to	him.	He	hesitated.	By	then	my	hands	had	found	an
old	knife	abandoned	by	somebody,	and	in	one	fluid	movement	I	struck	it	into
the	boy’s	groin.	I	was	surprised	when	he	fell	on	the	top	of	me	without	a	sound.
I	pulled	out	the	knife	and	struck	him	again	in	the	nape	of	his	neck.
“Hey!”	 there	 was	 surprise	 and	 shock	 in	 the	 voice	 of	 the	 man	 who	 was
running	towards	our	tangled	forms.	I	saw	others	following	him.	I	struggled	to
get	away	from	the	boy	but	he	was	heavy.	I	was	drenched	in	sweat	and	blood	by
the	 time	 I	 wriggled	 out	 from	 under	 him.	 Instinctively	 I	 ran	 into	 the	 forest
bordering	my	village.	I	ran	with	whatever	strength	was	left	in	my	body,	away
from	these	demons,	away	from	my	past,	away	from	the	life	I	had	known.	I	kept
running	for	the	sake	of	my	dear,	useless,	meaningless,	hollow,	shallow	life.	I
panted	and	puffed	my	way	towards	safety,	slipping	on	the	decaying	carcasses
of	my	brothers	and	friends.	But	it	did	not	matter	then.	They	were	just	carcasses,
waiting	 for	 the	 vultures	 to	 finish	 what	 the	 Devas	 had	 started.	 Death	 was
following	me	and	I	was	chasing	my	life	which	was	running	away	swiftly.
A	 sharp	 pain	 pierced	 my	 shoulders	 and	 I	 saw	 fresh	 sprouts	 of	 blood
dripping,	 marking	 my	 trail.	 The	 bastards	 were	 shooting	 me.	 Arrows	 whined
past	my	ears	and	landed	with	sickening	thuds	in	the	tree	trunks	all	around.	One
of	them	could	split	open	my	throat	and	then	this	nightmare	would	mercifully
end.	 Then	 everything	 faded	 away.	 I	 had	 a	 weightless	 feeling,	 as	 if	 I	 was
floating.	 A	 sea	 of	 dark	 green	 swallowed	 me.	 Branches	 hit	 my	 face.	 I	 was
falling,	 falling	 rapidly	 down	 a	 dark	 abyss.	 So	 this	 is	 what	 death	 was	 like.	 So
sudden	and	kind.	The	caresses	on	my	face,	the	sensation	of	weightlessness,	the
pleasure	of	floating,	and	whack!.	For	a	moment	I	was	dead.
When	I	came	back	to	the	 light,	 I	was	 lying	 on	a	crude	rope	 cot	inside	a
stinking	cave.	There	were	moans	coming	from	all	around	me.	I	tried	to	sit	up,
but	was	forced	to	sink	back	as	pain	grabbed	me	in	its	claws.	I	turned	my	head
slowly	and	saw	that	there	were	many	people	lying	around	the	cave	in	various
stages	 of	 decay.	 I	 shivered.	 Was	 I	 a	 prisoner-of-war	 and	 at	 the	 mercy	 of	 the
Devas?	 But	 when	 had	 the	 Devas	 ever	 taken	 prisoners?	 More	 over,	 I	 was	 a
civilian	and	not	a	soldier.	I	lay	there	with	useless	thoughts	buzzing	in	my	head
which	 I	 tried	 to	 make	 sense	 of.	 The	 sound	 of	 people	 talking	 floated	 down	 to

me,	“Half	of	them	will	definitely	not	make	it.	The	others	might	take	at	least	a
month	to	even	start	walking.”	The	tongue	was	definitely	classy	Tamil,	the	kind
used	by	educated	and	pretentious	city	folk.	I	realized	I	was	not	among	foes.	But
the	 voices	 sounded	 matter-of-fact	 and	 their	 dark	 prophecy	 filled	 me	 with
indescribable	 terror.	 Slowly,	 like	 waves	 lapping	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 Poorna,
bubbles	 of	 memories	 rose	 from	 my	 drugged	 mind	 and	 broke	 into	 my
consciousness.	 It	 hurt	 so	 much	 that	 I	 started	 wailing.	 Many	 cries	 echoed
through	the	cave	from	the	throats	of	men	waiting	for	death.	I	heard	the	voice	of
a	defeated	people	moaning	the	loss	of	simplicity	and	a	meaning	in	their	lives
which	 they	 never	 had.	 Perhaps,	 it	 was	 in	 one	 of	 those	 moments,	 when	 I	 lost
myself	amidst	the	cries	of	my	people,	that	I	vowed	revenge	against	the	Devas.

7	Lore	of	the	losers
Ravana
We	 had	 been	 walking	 like	 this	 for	 four	 months	 and	 were	 now	 tired	 and
hungry.	 I	 sensed	 most	 of	 the	 warriors	 were	 bored	 when	 I	 started	 my	 usual
morning	discourse,	 “Today	we	will	learn	about	the	war	of	the	ten	kings,	 that
led	to	the	Asura	empire’s	final	collapse	and	the	advent	of	the	Devas.	Initially,
the	 Devas	 were	 just	 a	 nuisance	 to	 the	 mighty	 Asura	 kings.	 They	 went	 on
rampages	in	^.	 I	wnce	to	thethe	border	towns	once	in	a	while.	However,	 with
the	advent	of	Indra,	things	started	to	change	rapidly.	Indra	had	nothing	to	lose.
Tales	of	his	savagery	preceded	him.	He	had	ransacked	many	small	kingdoms
north-west	of	the	Himalayas	and	burned	beautiful	cities.	He	butchered	all	living
beings	 in	 a	 captured	 city	 and	 lit	 huge	 funeral	 pyres,	 around	 which	 the	 Devas
danced	and	chanted.
When	the	ten	kings	of	the	Asura	Council	decided	that	it	was	time	to	teach
these	barbarians	a	lesson,	Indra	had	already	established	himself	with	his	sharp
shooters	in	the	barren	and	snowy	ridges	of	the	rugged	mountains	of	Gandhara.
The	 mighty	 Asura	 army,	 even	 without	 great	 military	 or	 tactical	 superiority,
would	 have	 simply	 crushed	 the	 small	 contingent	 of	 Deva	 marauders	 by	 its
sheer	 numbers	 and	 superior	 arm	 power.	 But	 in	 the	 narrow	 valleys	 of	 the
Gandhara,	 the	 elephants	 of	 the	 ten	 kings	 were	 quite	 useless.	 The	 Asura	 kings
were	 used	 to	 fighting	 in	 the	 wide	 open	 spaces	 between	 the	 Ganges	 and	 the
Indus.	 The	 elephant	 battalion,	 the	 infantry	 with	 heavy	 clubs	 and	 swords,	 the
chariots,	 which	 were	 more	 like	 goods	 carriers	 and	 carried	 reserve	 weapons
and	men,	were	more	suited	to	wide	open	spaces.
But	 Indra	 showed	 his	 brilliance	 when	 he	 chose	 the	 narrow	 Gandhara
valleys	to	encounter	the	Asura	kings.	He	waited	in	the	heights	of	the	mountains
for	the	Asura	kings	to	come	and	fight	the	battle	on	his	terms.	The	Asuras	were

quite	 confident	 of	 the	 outcome.	 They	 had	 faced	 countless	 attacks	 from	 other
tribes	 from	 the	 north	 and	 north-west	 before.	 This	 was	 just	 another	 of	 those
picnics,	 when	 they	 would	 crush	 the	 enemy,	 capture	 their	 leader,	 forgive	 him
magnanimously,	and	offer	the	vanquished	party	a	banquet	in	their	palaces.
Poor	 devils,	 they	 did	 not	 know	 who	 they	 were	 dealing	 with.	 This	 was	 a
different	kind	of	enemy	–	vicious,	ruthless	and	with	an	indomitable	will	to	win.
I	 have	 never	 been	 to	 Gandhara,	 but	 what	 we	 learned	 from	 Brahma	 gave	 us	 a
pretty	 good	 idea	 of	 what	 it	 could	 have	 been	 at	 the	 time	 of	 the	 war	 of	 the	 ten
kings.”
I	 had	 drawn	 a	 rough	 map	 of	 north-western	 India	 on	 the	 sand	 and	 was
surrounded	 by	 my	 brothers	 and	 Prahastha,	 a	 capable	 middle-aged	 man,	 who
was	 the	 captain	 of	 our	 soldiers.	 The	 other	 warriors	 listened	 carefully.
Prahastha	claimed	he	was	my	mother ’s	distant	relative	and	hence	my	maternal
uncle,	 though	 I	 doubted	 it.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 my	 mother	 had	 many	 Asura
relatives,	so	it	could	have	been	true.	If	he	thought	I	was	going	to	bestow	special
favours	 on	 him	 after	 I	 became	 king,	 he	 was	 going	 to	 be	 disappointed.	 But
Prahastha	was	a	capable	and	intelligent	man	and	I	respected	him.
I	 paused	 when	 I	 saw	 some	 of	 the	 soldiers	 getting	 edgy.	 I	 felt	 sorry	 for
them.	 Most	 of	 the	 soldiers	 were	 illiterate	 and	 poor.	 They	 would	 have	 been
farmers	 or	 artisans	 or	 traders	 in	 normal	 times,	 but	 driven	 from	 their
homeland,	 they	 had	 followed	 their	 once-great	 Emperor,	 who	 had	 promised
them	their	old,	secure	world.	They	were	betrayed	and	had	now	put	their	hopes
on	a	homeless	young	daredevil	like	me,	to	deliver	back	to	them	their	long	lost
world.	 Perhaps	 I	 was	 becoming	 a	 megalomaniac,	 but	 certainly	 I	 would	 try	 to
deliver	them	their	dreams.
“Indra,	 had	 initially	 made	 a	 tactical	 blunder.	 He	 had	 attacked	 the	 walled
city	of	Pragya,	on	the	banks	of	the	Sarswathi,	which	was	a	major	port	of	King
Pramyudha.	He	was	not	a	man	of	half	measures.	He	unleashed	his	entire	army.
500	elephants,	10,000	infantry	with	heavy	swords	and	clubs,	and	500	archers
in	 bull	 chariots,	 burst	 out	 of	 the	 city	 walls.	 Indra	 had	 a	 small	 army	 of	 600
mounted	archers.	He	put	200	of	them	to	attack	the	city’s	front	gate	and	tried	to
enter	the	city	from	the	rear.	Pramyudha	opened	all	four	gates	and	his	mighty
army	divided	itself	and	converged	at	the	front.
Indra	 was	 shocked	 by	 this	 daring	 move.	 Like	 a	 cornered	 rat,	 the	 Deva
army	 fought	 back	 viciously.	 But	 there	 were	 far	 too	 many	 Asura	 forces.
Moreover,	 ces.1">I	 the	 wide	 open	 plains	 gave	 the	 Asura	 army	 room	 to
manoeuvre.	 The	 Devas,	 on	 their	 horses,	 were	 easy	 targets.	 From	 atop

elephants,	warriors	showered	heavy	javelins	and	spears	and	the	heavy	arrows
made	 the	 Deva	 armours	 look	 like	 onion	 peels.	 Indra	 ordered	 a	 retreat,	 but	 it
was	impossible	to	get	out	of	the	mess	he	had	led	his	army	into.	More	than	80
percent	of	his	 army	was	butchered.	But	Indra	fought	valiantly	 with	 his	sword
and	even	managed	to	wound	Pramyudha.
It	was	foolish	of	Pramyudha	to	get	down	from	his	elephant	and	challenge
Indra.	And	while	Pramyudha	fought	Indra,	the	idiotic	Asura	soldiers	stood	in	a
circle	and	clapped	and	cheered	with	each	thrust	and	plunge	of	the	combatants
swords.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 the	 Asura	 warriors	 were	 being	 entertained.	 They	 even
cheered	Indra	for	his	superior	swordplay!
Pramyudha	 played	 by	 the	 book.	 His	 footwork	 was	 perfect,	 so	 were	 his
jabs	 and	 thrusts.	 But	 Indra	 was	 fighting	 for	 his	 life	 and	 he	 referred	 to	 a	 very
different	book.	Quite	unexpectedly,	he	threw	sand	into	his	opponent’s	eyes	with
his	 shield.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 he	 deftly	 cut	 with	 his	 sword.	 Pramyudha,	 the
accomplished	 swordsman	 that	 he	 was,	 ducked,	 but	 was	 a	 bit	 too	 late.	 He
received	 a	 deep	 wound	 on	 his	 shoulder	 and	 fainted	 in	 the	 battlefield.	 In	 the
confusion	 that	 followed,	 Indra	 forced	 his	 way	 out	 of	 the	 shocked	 crowd,
thrusting	 his	 sword	 into	 three	 soldiers	 who	 stood	 in	 his	 way.	 He	 quickly
mounted	his	horse	and	vanished	in	a	trice,	followed	by	a	handful	of	survivors.”
“Tell	 me	 any	 story	 about	 a	 fallen	 king,	 and	 I	 will	 show	 you	 someone
whose	foolishness	is	only	exceeded	by	his	vanity,”	Prahastha	added.
“True,”	 I	 continued,	 “Had	 the	 fallen	 king	 let	 bygones	 be	 bygones	 and
gone	back	 to	ruling	his	kingdom,	Indra’s	attack	 would	 have	been	but	a	small
footnote	 in	 history.	 Instead,	 his	 huge	 ego	 was	 hurt.	 Pramyudha	 did	 not	 take
solace	 from	 the	 fact	 that	 his	 subjects	 had	 been	 spared	 the	 fate	 of	 citizens	 of
other	cities	which	had	fallen	to	Indra.	He	was	not	satisfied	that,	except	for	his
personal	 defeat	 at	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 enemy	 king,	 his	 army	 had	 succeeded	 in
crushing	 the	 Deva	 army.	 His	 image	 had	 taken	 a	 beating.	 Asura	 kings	 of	 yore
did	not	have	divine	right	to	the	kingdom.	A	king	was	an	elected	leader,	the	most
accomplished	person	in	the	city,	a	great	warrior.	And	that	was	all.”
“Pramyudha	 learnt	 from	 his	 court	 spies	 that	 his	 popularity	 had	 fallen
among	 his	 subjects	 and	 that	 he	 would	 not	 get	 re-elected.	 He	 needed	 to	 take
drastic	action	to	restore	his	prestige.	Such	thoughts	are	devastating	for	a	king.
There	ought	to	be	no	personal	failures	or	victories.	If	your	army	has	won,	it
does	not	matter	whether	your	opponent	is	a	better	swordsman	than	you.	But	the
Asuras	 always	 wore	 their	 egos	 on	 their	 breastplates.	 Their	 thinking	 thus
became	 clouded	 and	 the	 chain	 of	 strategic	 mistakes	 began	 to	 unwind,”

Prahastha	added,	while	I	drank	water	from	the	pitcher.
I	could	see	that	the	audience	was	listening	with	rapt	attention	now.	Pleased,
I	 continued,	 “The	 king	 sent	 spies	 in	 all	 directions.	 He	 had	 to	 somehow	 trace
Indra	and	take	revenge.	Paramyudha	also	called	on	the	General	Council	of	the
Asura	kings.	This	was	a	body	of	equals	from	all	parts	of	India.	Ten	kings	met
once	 a	 year	 to	 decide	 about	 water	 sharing,	 fixing	 customs,	 excise,	 and	 toll
rates,	 port	 levies,	 and	 to	 exchange	 musicians	 and	 artisans.	 An	 emergency
meeting	was	rarely	called,	unless	there	was	a	grave	threat	to	the	security	of	any
of	 the	 kingdoms.	 Generally,	 the	 kingdoms	 maintained	 standing	 armies,	 but
because	of	rapid	cultural	growth,	their	fighting	prowess	had	greatly	declined.
There	was	something	mysterious	about	this	land.	When	great	conquering
armies	 succeeded	 in	 their	 mission	 and	 settled	 down	 between	 the	 great	 IndusGanges	 plain,	 they	 seemed	 to	 lose	 their	 tough	 edge	 and	 got	 rounded	 and
feminine.	The	land	changed	them	from	great	barbarians	to	gentle	creatures	cle
ges	 with	 a	 taste	 for	 the	 fine	 things	 of	 life.	 This	 happened	 to	 all	 the	 great
conquering	armies	before	the	Asuras,	and	you	can	see	it	now	happening	to	the
present	Deva	kingdoms	of	the	north.
And	 it	 happened	 to	 the	 Asura	 people	 as	 well.	 But,	 the	 kings	 wanted	 to
think	of	themselves	as	the	descendants	of	great	warriors	who	swept	through	the
country.	They	were	supremely	confident	about	their	military	might.	The	army
was	 nothing	 more	 than	 a	 bloated	 organization	 with	 musicians,	 dancing	 girls,
magicians	 and	 petty	 tricksters,	 acrobats,	 cooks,	 flower	 vendors,	 traders	 and
priests.	The	numbers	we	heard	of	in	stories	were	untrue.	In	an	army	of	10,000,
only	 a	 few	 were	 actual	 warriors.	 The	 others	 accompanied	 the	 army	 to	 the
battlefields	and	made	a	nuisance	of	themselves.
Six	of	the	ten	kings	disagreed	at	the	General	Council	meeting	that	Indra’s
attack	 was	 not	 alarming.	 They	 believed	 that	 any	 prosperous	 city	 could	 be
attacked.	 But	 Pramyudha	 carried	 the	 day	 with	 his	 convincing	 arguments.	 He
said	 that	 the	 tribes	 which	 raided	 the	 frontier	 towns	 of	 the	 Indus	 plains	 never
dared	 to	 attack	 the	 capital	 city	 of	 a	 prominent	 kingdom.	 This	 group,
Pramyudha	 thought,	 did	 not	 seem	 to	 be	 the	 usual	 raiders	 who	 attacked	 the
granaries	 and	 carried	 away	 whatever	 they	 could.	 In	 fact,	 these	 people	 had
shown	 unusual	 daring	 and	 cunning	 and	 they	 were	 using	 a	 strange	 animal	 to
carry	 out	 their	 raids.	 The	 Asura	 army	 was	 surprised	 by	 the	 deftness	 of	 the
animals,	 which	 unlike	 bulls,	 were	 swift	 and	 agile.	 Unless	 this	 enemy	 was
crushed,	Pramyudha	argued,	our	people	would	live	under	the	constant	threat	of
these	 barbarian	 hordes.	 However,	 that	 night	 the	 Council	 adjourned	 without	 a

decision.
The	 morning	 session	 broke	 when	 a	 messenger	 entered	 the	 camp	 of	 the
Asura	 king	 of	 the	 north-western	 territory,	 and	 announced	 that	 horseback
tribesmen	 had	 set	 Multamukha	 on	 fire.	 This	 was	 a	 major	 city	 on	 one	 of	 the
most	 prominent	 trade	 routes	 that	 stretched	 from	 the	 mouth	 of	 the	 Ganga	 to
Gandhara	 and	 beyond.	 The	 attack	 tipped	 the	 scales.	 All	 ten	 kings	 decided	 to
join	 hands	 and	 form	 a	 huge	 army	 and	 decimate	 not	 only	 the	 horse-mounted
tribes,	 but	 also	 all	 the	 small-time	 pirates	 and	 robber	 gangs	 who	 attacked	 the
major	trade	routes	to	the	great	cities	of	Egypt	and	Mesopotamia.
The	 Council	 met	 for	 the	 third	 day	 and	 war	 plans	 were	 drawn	 up.
Pramyudha	won	the	generalship,	not	because	of	his	seniority	or	prowess,	but
because	 he	 was	 the	 only	 one	 who	 did	 not	 have	 any	 second	 thoughts	 about
following	 the	 enemy	 into	 unknown	 territory.	 Most	 of	 the	 kingdoms	 were
comfortable	 and	 no	 one	 wanted	 a	 war.	 Trade	 was	 booming	 and	 life	 was
generally	good.	The	old	crowd	of	daring	soldiers	who	had	followed	Shiva	on
their	 bulls,	slept	on	 dirt,	and	ate	once	a	week,	had	vanished.	These	 were	men
who	 had	 tasted	 the	 sweetness	 of	 life	 and	 did	 not	 want	 to	 fight	 extended	 wars
with	tribes	that	had	nothing	to	lose.
Pramyudha	started	from	the	bank	of	the	Indus,	with	over	a	lakh	of	archers
and	 warriors	 armed	 with	 clubs,	 spears	 and	 curved	 swords.	 About	 10,000
elephants	and	3,000	bullock	chariots	were	accompanied	by	10,000	drummers,
flutists,	 dancing	 girls,	 camp	 builders,	 bards	 to	 record	 the	 heroics	 and	 render
songs	 of	 Asura	 bravery,	 and	 the	 other	 dregs	 of	 society	 who	 usually
accompanied	 an	 Asura	 army.	 This	 mighty	 crowd	 –	 there	 is	 no	 more	 suitable
word,	crossed	the	Indus	and	Sarswathi	rivers	and	started	hunting	down	smalltime	robbers	and	marauding	tribes.	The	army	marched	on	with	great	success.
Pramyudha	 maintained	 excellent	 communication	 lines	 with	 runners	 carrying
messages	between	the	villages	on	the	way.	Spies	informed	the	Asura	king	about
enemy	hideouts	and	the	army	descended	with	surprising	speed	and	ruthlessness
on	the	villages	suspected	to	harbour	enemy	spies.
Pramyudha	became	drunk	with	success.	His	spies	informed	him	that	Indra
was	 fleeing	 with	 a	 small	 army	 towards	 the	 north-western	 mountains	 of
Gandhara.	Pramyudha’s	bards	sang	praises	abo	cg	pnfout	him	and	this	ruffled
the	 fragile	 egos	 of	 the	 other	 nine	 kings,	 who	 were	 reluctantly	 accompanying
the	 army.	 They	 found	 themselves	 demoted	 to	 minor	 leaders	 in	 Pramyudha’s
service.	 Pramyudha	 himself	 was	 becoming	 haughtier	 by	 the	 day.	 Initially	 he
ignored	 the	 advice	 of	 the	 other	 kings.	 Later,	 he	 openly	 criticized	 them	 and

made	fun	of	their	military	strategies.”
I	pointed	out	the	course	of	Pramyudha’s	army,	marching	happily	towards
disaster	about	1000	years	ago.	The	soldiers	leaned	over	to	get	a	better	view	of
the	rough	map	I	had	drawn	on	the	ground.
Prahastha	 took	 over,	 as	 I	 was	 feeling	 parched	 and	 needed	 a	 break.	 He
started	in	his	throaty	voice,	“The	army	was	no	longer	a	compact	fighting	unit
by	the	time	it	reached	the	rugged	plains	at	the	base	of	the	Hindukush	mountains.
Three	 kings	 had	 rebelled	 and	 threatened	 to	 leave	 with	 their	 armies	 if	 the
campaign	was	not	called	off.	By	this	time,	Pramyudha	had	started	talking	about
conquering	 the	 West,	 including	 Egypt,	 and	 proclaiming	 himself	 the	 Emperor
of	 the	 world.	 When	 the	 three	 kings	 rebelled,	 he	 promptly	 arrested	 them	 for
treason	and	after	a	brief	trial,	executed	them	openly.	That	sent	a	shiver	through
the	army.	Their	morale	was	already	at	its	nadir.
The	campaign	was	not	turning	out	to	be	the	picnic	they	had	imagined.	The
great	march	was	taking	its	toll.	Soon,	a	large	part	of	the	armies	belonging	to
the	 executed	 kings,	 rebelled,	 and	 many	 others	 deserted.	 Pramyudha	 hit	 back
with	brutal	force.	The	bards	sang	that	he	slayed	9,000	of	his	own	armymen.	He
also	 sent	 a	 huge	 contingent	 to	 chase	 deserters	 and	 bring	 them	 back	 to	 be
executed	after	a	mock	trial.	Some	of	the	warriors	remained	neutral	during	this
time.	It	seemed	that	the	Asura	army	would	inflict	a	defeat	upon	itself	through
this	 rabid	 infighting.	 Finally,	 Pramyudha	 was	 able	 to	 persuade	 six	 kings	 to
remain	 with	 him	 and	 the	 rebellion	 was	 put	 down	 with	 great	 difficulty.	 But	 he
had	lost	precious	time.	It	was	already	winter	by	the	time	he	decided	to	penetrate
deep	into	the	mountain	country	in	search	of	Indra	and	his	army
Viboga,	the	king	of	Varanasi,	asked	Pramyudha	to	wait	until	summer,	but
Pramyudha	 declined.	 He	 wanted	 to	 capture	 Indra	 and	 drag	 him	 back	 to	 his
capital	at	the	earliest.	He,	who	would	be	the	Emperor	of	the	world,	would	not
be	 cowed	 by	 steep	 mountains	 and	 snows.	 Against	 better	 counsel,	 Pramyudha
ordered	 his	 army	 to	 move	 north-west.	 The	 narrow	 mountain	 roads	 were
slippery.	 The	 elephants	 slipped	 and	 fell	 into	 gorges	 or	 on	 the	 road,	 blocking
progress	 for	 hours.	 Bullock-drawn	 chariots	 and	 even	 elephants,	 had	 to	 be
abandoned	 on	 the	 narrow	 road.	 The	 infantry	 column	 broke	 up	 and	 soldiers
walked	as	they	pleased.	The	heavy	axes,	clubs	and	bows	were	difficult	to	carry
and	most	of	the	soldiers,	coming	from	the	sweltering	plains,	were	not	used	to
the	 freezing	 mountain	 cold.	 To	 add	 to	 their	 woes,	 Pramyudha	 kept	 all	 his
supplies	in	the	bullock	carts	and	these	had	to	be	carried	uphill	by	the	warriors.
The	 motley	 crowd	 of	 dancing	 girls,	 bards	 and	 musicians;	 magicians	 and

priests;	became	a	nuisance	and	slowed	down	the	progress	drastically.”
I	took	over	the	story	from	Prahastha,	“The	mob	walked	for	more	than	a
month	in	search	of	the	elusive	Indra	and	his	followers.	Many	deserted	the	army
and	 others	 died	 due	 to	 the	 elements	 and	 exhaustion.	 The	 men	 had	 exhausted
most	 of	 the	 supplies	 and	 except	 for	 an	 occasional	 mountains	 goat	 and	 small
birds,	 nothing	 else	 was	 edible.	 More	 than	 half	 the	 elephants	 were	 dead	 and
bullocks	were	killed	to	feed	the	hungry	and	tired	army.
The	 army	 had	 lost	 most	 of	 its	 heavy	 weaponry.	 The	 dregs	 had	 already
fallen	behind	and	the	column	of	soldiers	stretched	more	than	seven	miles.	The
group	 of	 dirty,	 ragged	 men,	 with	 heavy	 unwieldy	 weapons,	 slowly	 and
painfully	 dragged	 themselves	 through	 the	 labyrinths	 of	 the	 treacherous
mountains.	In	the	past	year,	they	had	not	seen	a	single	Deva	soldier.	The	only
time	the	Asura	warriors	csurough	had	taken	to	arms	were	against	themselves
and	highway	robbers,	on	this	great	march.
By	this	time,	Pramyudha	also	had	discovered	his	folly	and	wanted	to	turn
back	towards	the	cozy	comfort	of	his	beautiful	capital	city.	But	the	army	was
hopelessly	 lost.	 Many	 of	 the	 mountain	 passes	 were	 now	 closed	 due	 to
avalanches	and	landslides.	Pramyudha	sent	messengers	upon	messengers,	in	all
possible	 directions,	 asking	 for	 help	 and	 supplies	 from	 petty	 Asura	 chieftains.
But	 not	 a	 single	 messenger	 returned.	 It	 is	 believed	 that	 these	 messages	 were
intercepted	 by	 Indra’s	 army.	 Then,	 when	 the	 Asura	 army’s	 morale	 was	 at	 its
lowest	ebb,	on	a	cold,	foggy	morning,	Indra’s	horse-mounted	archers	started
raining	 flaming	 arrows	 on	 them.	 Pramyudha’s	 army	 was	 stuck	 in	 a	 narrow,
mountain	gorge	and	stretched	over	ten	miles	in	single	file	formation.”
I	 made	 a	 circle	 around	 a	 point	 in	 the	 map	 to	 emphasis	 my	 point.	 “Indra
trapped	the	mighty,	numerically	stronger,	Asura	forces	in	a	narrow	mountain
gorge	 with	 deep	 canyons	 on	 one	 side	 and	 high	 rugged	 rocks	 on	 the	 other.
Perched	 on	 agile	 horses,	 the	 Deva	 archers	 rained	 lightweight	 arrows	 on	 the
helpless	 Asura	 crowd.	 Indra	 had	 hardly	 500	 warriors	 to	 take	 on	 a	 50,000strong	Asura	army.	But	what	followed	was	plain	slaughter.	The	heavy	arrows
of	 the	 Asuras	 could	 not	 defy	 gravity	 and	 reach	 the	 mountain	 tops	 where	 the
Deva	 archers	 had	 stationed	 themselves.	 Axes,	 clubs	 and	 spears	 were	 quite
useless.	 There	 was	 nothing	 the	 Asura	 army	 could	 do	 to	 stop	 the	 huge	 stones
which	came	rolling	down,	crushing	scores	of	men	in	their	way,	but	to	wait	for
their	turn	to	die.	After	a	brief	attempt	to	fight,	the	majority	of	the	army	fell	into
a	disorderly	retreat.
Pramyudha,	despite	all	his	faults,	was	brave,	and	he	attempted	to	raise	the

morale	 of	 his	 fleeing	 army	 by	 trying	 to	 climb	 the	 rocks	 where	 the	 biggest
group	of	Deva	archers	was	placed.	With	adroitness,	he	started	to	shoot	arrows
with	 surprising	 accuracy	 and	 succeeded	 in	 hitting	 quite	 a	 few	 Deva	 archers.
Seeing	their	King’s	valour,	hundreds	of	Asura	archers	started	following	him.
But	the	majority	of	his	army	fled,	and	except	for	the	brave	king	of	Varanasi,
who	tried	to	dissuade	Pramyudha	from	this	doomed	campaign,	the	five	other
kings	of	the	Council	also	fled	with	their	armies.	In	the	stampede	which	ensued,
thousands	were	trampled	to	death	and	many	found	their	graves	at	the	bottom	of
the	ravines.
Pramyudha	and	Viboga	fought	their	way	uphill	with	their	small	crew	of	a
few	 thousand.	 Even	 this	 small	 determined	 troop	 outnumbered	 the	 Deva	 army.
Indra	 understood	 the	 danger	 and	 quickly	 led	 the	 fight	 himself.	 Once	 more
Pramyudha	and	Indra	were	face	to	face	in	the	battlefield.	Viboga	was	fighting
his	way	up	and	shouted	at	Pramyudha	to	retreat	and	let	him	lead.	But	this	was
the	 chance	 for	 Pramyudha	 to	 avenge	 himself	 for	 the	 shameful	 defeat	 he	 had
suffered	in	the	last	combat	with	Indra.	He	cornered	Indra,	who	soon	got	tired,
defending	 the	 powerful	 jabs,	 cuts	 and	 thrusts	 of	 his	 opponent’s	 sword.	 But
unlike	 the	 Asuras,	 the	 Devas	 do	 not	 stand	 in	 a	 circle	 and	 applaud	 good
swordsmanship	when	their	leader ’s	life	is	in	peril.	A	cleverly	aimed	arrow	hit
Pramyudha’s	 neck	 and	 emerged	 from	 his	 right	 eye.	 The	 shock	 paralyzed
Viboga	and	in	those	split	seconds,	seven	Deva	swords	hacked	Viboga	to	pieces.
Pramyudha	continued	fighting	for	a	few	more	seconds,	but	Indra,	with	a
clean	sweep	of	his	sword,	gracefully	severed	his	opponent’s	head.	His	cry	of
triumph	sent	shock	waves	through	the	remaining	Asura	warriors.	Indra	raised
the	severed	head	of	Pramyudha	on	his	sword	tip	for	all	his	opponents	to	see.
The	Asura	army	was	in	full	flight.	Indra	allowed	a	few	thousand	to	escape	and
then	closed	in	to	butcher	the	unfortunate	multitude	left	behind.	Thousands	were
slain	on	that	fateful	day.
The	disorganized	Asura	army	was	forced	out	of	mountains	by	the	Deva
warriors,	 who	 knew	 the	 territory	 well.	 Once	 they	 reache	 ce	 tuntains	 d	 the
plains,	 the	 Asura	 army	 in	 full	 flight,	 pursed	 by	 mounted	 soldiers,	 numbered
only	 about	 200.	 The	 five	 kings	 who	 had	 taken	 flight,	 could	 have	 turned	 back
and	conducted	an	organized	counter	attack.	The	horse	riders	were	in	the	open
where	the	heavy	equipment	of	the	Asura	army	could	have	wiped	them	out.	That
was	the	reason	why	Indra	had	tactically	kept	his	army	at	a	safe	distance,	beyond
the	range	of	the	heavy	Asura	arrows,	but	within	the	range	of	his	lighter	arrows.
Soon,	 the	 Deva	 ranks	 swelled	 with	 fortune	 hunters	 and	 deserters	 from	 the

Asura	army,	the	kind	of	people	who	always	want	to	be	on	the	winning	side.	The
news	spread	that	the	Asuras	were	in	full	flight	after	a	rout	and	the	Devas	were
following	them.	Robbers	and	other	wild	tribes,	who	had	gone	into	hiding	when
the	 mighty	 army	 was	 sweeping	 northwards,	 came	 out	 and	 joined	 the	 Deva
ranks.
The	first	to	know	the	taste	of	the	Deva’s	might,	was	the	motley	crowd	of
drummers	 and	 dancing	 girls	 and	 other	 useless	 crew	 members	 who	 were
returning	home,	unaware	of	the	fate	of	their	army.	They	were	first	overtaken
by	the	fleeing	Asura	army	and	then	the	swelling	Deva	hordes	descended	upon
them	 like	 a	 plague.	 The	 mob	 was	 out	 of	 control	 and	 except	 for	 the	 original
hundred	 warriors,	 no	 one	 listened	 to	 Indra’s	 command.	 The	 majority	 were
aboriginal	tribesmen	and	plunderers	who	stopped	at	each	village	to	loot.	They
ransacked	houses,	plundered	cities	on	their	way,	hacked	thousands	of	ordinary
folk	to	death,	and	gang	raped	women.	Soon,	citizens	of	the	big	cities	began	to
flee	 even	 before	 the	 defeated	 Asura	 army	 reached	 them.	 It	 became	 a	 human
avalanche	 and	 riots	 broke	 out.	 Utter	 chaos	 reigned	 with	 an	 entire	 country
fleeing	 from	 a	 handful	 of	 barbarians.	 Then	 the	 Asura	 army	 also	 started
burning	 down	 cities	 during	 their	 flight,	 lest	 they	 fall	 into	 Deva	 hands.	 The
public	took	to	arms	and	the	standing	armies	of	small	towns	joined	the	public	to
stop	the	fleeing	Asura	army	from	looting	their	own	cities.	Civil	war	broke	out.
Rumours	spread	that	the	five	kings	had	joined	the	ranks	of	the	Devas	and
had	 murdered	 the	 other	 five,	 including	 the	 charismatic	 Pramyudha.	 Soon	 the
Asura	 kingdoms	 were	 fighting	 each	 other	 while	 the	 Devas	 grew	 in	 strength.
Indra’s	 prestige	 had	 risen	 tremendously	 after	 the	 Asura	 rout.	 Soon,	 other
wandering	 Deva	 hordes	 joined	 him,	 while	 the	 mighty	 Asura	 empire
disintegrated	before	their	eyes.
It	 took	 seven	 months	 for	 the	 great	 empire	 to	 crumble,	 an	 empire	 which
had	taken	a	thousand	years	to	reach	maturity.	Once	Indra	felt	confident	that	the
Asura	empire	was	weak	enough,	he	blasted	through	the	cocoon	of	the	Asura’s
protected	existence.	It	is	a	great	lesson	for	all	students	of	warfare	and	statecraft
on	how	to	treat	a	conquered	land.
A	civilization	draws	its	pride	from	the	cities	it	has	built,	the	books	it	has
produced,	the	artists	and	artisans	it	has	bred,	the	temples	it	has	built	and	so	on.
A	conqueror ’s	first	duty	is	to	aim	the	mightiest	blow	possible	on	these	edifices
of	 civilized	 existence.	 Indra	 did	 it	 beautifully.	 He	 demolished	 all	 that	 was
possible.	 He	 burned	 libraries,	 butchered	 poets	 and	 architects	 and	 pummelled
the	temples	and	hacked	women	and	children.	Soon,	everything	the	Asuras	held

precious	 was	 destroyed.	 And	 from	 there,	 the	 original	 Indra	 got	 the	 name
Purendra	 or	 ‘slayer	 of	 cities’.	 Soon,	 the	 Asuras	 had	 to	 go	 underground	 and
there	 was	 occasional	 resistance,	 but	 mostly	 ineffective.	 Indra	 built	 an	 empire
with	 the	 skeletons	 of	 the	 Asura	 civilization	 as	 its	 foundation.	 For	 nearly	 300
years,	the	country	was	under	the	total	control	of	the	Indra	dynasty.
During	 this	 period,	 the	 plains	 soothed	 the	 Deva	 temperament.	 Art	 and
culture	 once	 again	 regained	 their	 sway	 and	 the	 Devas	 began	 to	 lose	 their
fierceness.	They	also	became	creatures	of	comfort.	Great	cities,	though	much
inferior	 to	 those	 of	 the	 Asuras,	 were	 built.	 The	 process	 of	 synthesis	 start
cnthnfered	at	the	end	of	the	second	Indra’s	reign.	Shiva,	who	was	the	supreme
God	of	the	Asuras,	came	to	be	accepted	by	the	Devas	also.	The	great	teacher	of
the	Asura	tribe,	Brahma,	was	also	accepted	as	God.	The	later	Indra	kings	were
weak	 and	 soon	 became	 mere	 puppets	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 Vishnu,	 who	 was	 the
commander-in-chief	 of	 Indra	 III’s	 army.	 By	 the	 end	 of	 Indra	 XI’s	 reign,	 the
Vishnu	clan	was	virtually	ruling	the	country	and	the	Indra	kings	were	just	token
monarchs:	like	the	Shiva	kings	of	the	Asura	tribe,	who	had	become	just	a	small
power	 in	 the	 upper	 Himalayas,	 near	 Kailash,	 long	 before	 the	 rule	 of	 the	 ten
kings.
The	Vishnus	ruled	fo	l	in	preserving	the	Indra	name	and	the	Deva	culture
and	were	hailed	by	Brahmins	as	preservers	of	a	social	order.	Soon,	a	curious
set	of	thoughts	got	mixed	up.	I	do	not	know	whether	it	was	Brahmin	slyness	or
mere	 coincidence,	 but	 Brahma,	 the	 original	 possessor	 of	 knowledge,	 was
hailed	 as	 the	 Creator;	 Vishnu	 as	 the	 Preserver	 of	 the	 system;	 and	 ironically
Shiva,	 who	 built	 an	 empire,	 and	 not	 Indra,	 who	 destroyed,	 was	 hailed	 as	 the
Destroyer.	They	were	the	three	Gods	of	India	–	the	Trimurti.
The	 first	 members	 of	 these	 families	 were	 hailed	 as	 Gods	 and	 are	 still
revered	 by	 the	 Devas.	 We	 accept	 Shiva	 as	 God	 and	 also	 the	 first	 Brahma	 as
God.	But	the	Brahmin	insistence	that	Vishnu,	a	Deva	commander-in-chief	and	a
mere	 servant	 of	 a	 Deva	 king,	 be	 considered	 the	 supreme	 God,	 was	 hard	 to
accept.	 There	 were	 great	 rebellions	 by	 the	 subjugated	 Asuras	 against	 Vishnu.
Some	great	men	like	the	Hiranya	twins	and	Mahabali,	succeeded	in	establishing
an	extensive	Asura	empire	rivalling	the	empires	of	old,	for	a	short	period	of
time.	 But	 in	 later	 years,	 just	 as	 the	 Asura	 empire	 was	 divided	 into	 ten
kingdoms,	so	was	the	Deva	empire	split	into	many	petty	fiefdoms.
When	an	empire	crumbles	and	many	small	states	spring	up,	we	know	the
time	 has	 come	 to	 build	 a	 new	 empire.	 When	 half-castes	 like	 Bali	 in	 Central
India,	and	aborigines	like	Karthi	Veerarjuna	in	the	Sahya	mountains,	are	able

to	 carve	 huge	 kingdoms	 out	 of	 the	 Deva	 empire,	 we	 know	 that	 history	 has
come	full	circle.	Indra	had	but	a	small	army	to	take	on	the	mighty	but	divided
Asura	 empire.	 I	 hope	 you	 have	 learnt	 the	 lessons	 of	 that	 eventful	 war	 which
resulted	 in	 the	 fall	 of	 our	 people.	 The	 time	 has	 come	 for	 us	 to	 return	 the
favour.
Remember	 that	 the	 mighty	 Vishnu	 family	 also	 has	 weakened	 itself
through	 in-fighting	 and	 only	 a	 small	 group,	 ruling	 the	 tiny	 princely	 state	 of
Ayodhya	 near	 the	 River	 Sarayu,	 is	 worth	 mentioning.	 Our	 beloved	 Emperor
Mahabali	 believed	 that	 its	 young	 prince,	 Dasaratha,	 a	 relative	 of	 the	 present
king	 Anarnya,	 was	 the	 only	 one	 among	 the	 Devas	 capable	 of	 building	 an
empire.	So	let	us	continue	our	struggle	until	we	get	ourselves	horses	and	arms.
Then	we’ll	show	the	Devas	that	they	have	forgotten	the	lessons	of	history.”
The	 lecture	 was	 rather	 heavy	 for	 the	 crowd	 assembled	 before	 us.	 It	 was
better	 to	 give	 them	 short,	 simple	 orders	 which	 they	 could	 follow,	 instead	 of
indigestible	 doses	 of	 history.	 I	 was	 disappointed	 that	 no	 one	 had	 contradicted
me	or	raised	any	questions	during	my	long	address.	They	just	sat	there	staring
stupidly.	If	I	was	to	quench	even	a	little	of	my	fiery	ambition,	I	would	have	to
devote	 a	 great	 deal	 of	 time	 to	 developing	 leaders.	 One	 day,	 the	 passive
submission	of	this	group	could	be	advantageous	to	me.	What	my	predecessors
had	 tried	 to	 do	 was	 to	 run	 a	 republic.	 They	 wanted	 democracy,	 where	 each
man,	like	this	bunch	of	idiots	in	front	of	me,	decided	the	future	of	the	nation.
What	such	a	race	needed	was	a	strong	dictator.	Mahabali	tried	to	become
one	and	failed.	He	was	too	soft	to	be	a	dictator.	Earlier	kings	like	Hiranya	and
his	brother,	were	cruel	and	ruthless,	and	were	so	harsh	that	they	lost	popular
support.	What	they	needed	was	someone	who	was	intelligent,	ambitious,	stron
citie	cg	and	ruthless,	and	of	course,	benevolent	–	perhaps	someone	like	me.
I	gave	the	order	for	the	congregation	of	would-be	warriors	to	break	for
lunch.	I	sat	with	my	brothers	and	cousins	under	a	banyan	tree,	not	too	far	from
the	 meadow	 where	 the	 warriors	 were	 making	 merry	 and	 cracking	 raunchy
jokes.	We	started	with	the	leftover	debate	of	the	past	few	days.	Where	should
we	 start	 our	 campaign?	 Vibhishana	 wanted	 to	 capture	 the	 small	 Deva	 village
near	the	river	Kaveri.	It	had	a	small	fort,	granaries,	a	tiny	school,	but	nothing
else.	 The	 people	 were	 dirt	 poor	 and	 a	 small	 band	 of	 malnourished	 men
guarded	the	dilapidated	fort.	It	would	be	just	a	token	victory.	Kumbakarna	was
dead	against	it,	saying	that	it	would	be	a	waste	of	effort	and	alert	the	other	Deva
kings	about	our	army.	I	thought	it	a	bit	preposterous	to	call	this	motley	crowd
an	army,	but	allowed	Kumbakarna	to	get	away	with	his	illusions.	He	wanted	an

all-out	campaign	against	Karthi	Veerarjuna	in	the	northern	Sahyas.	My	uncles,
Malyavan	 and	 Sumali,	 wanted	 none	 of	 this.	 They	 wished	 to	 continue	 the
guerilla	warfare	against	the	Central	Indian	Deva	kingdoms	and	finally	take	on
Amaravathi.
It	 was	 a	 long	 and	 drawn-out	 dream	 without	 any	 strategy	 or	 plan.	 I	 was
part-amused,	half-irritated,	with	this	elaborate	joke	of	the	past	few	days.	I	was
trying	hard	to	make	this	a	democratic	forum,	where	we	would	take	a	decision
with	mutual	consent	after	due	discussions.	But,	I	was	convinced	that	democracy
would	 not	 do	 with	 these	 people.	 If	 they,	 who	 were	 my	 close	 kin,	 could	 not
agree	 upon	 the	 direction	 the	 campaign	 should	 take,	 without	 stopping	 to	 think
whether	 we	 had	 the	 arms,	 means	 and	 men	 to	 conduct	 the	 same,	 how	 could	 I
expect	the	common	Asuras	to	think	with	any	clarity?
“Enough!”	I	was	getting	flustered	and	wanted	to	end	this	farce.	“I	want	to
attack	Lanka	and	that	settles	it.	I	will	not	allow	any	further	discussions.”
“But…”	I	stopped	Vibhishana	with	a	steely	glare	and	saw	with	dismay	that
he	cowered	before	me.	Either	I	was	getting	better	at	intimidating	people	or	my
younger	brother	was	a	bigger	coward	than	I	had	previously	imagined.	Before
my	uncles	could	start	rolling	out	their	grandiose,	hare-brained	schemes,	I	said
with	determination,	“First	someone	has	to	get	our	mother	and	sister	from	the
island.	 It	 might	 get	 too	 dangerous	 there.	 Then	 we	 will	 plan	 the	 campaign	 to
attack	the	island.	I	want	the	throne	where	that	oaf	of	a	half-	brother	is	resting
his	fat	arse	and	I	want	it	fast.”
I	 can	 still	 see	 the	 shocked	 expressions	 in	 my	 uncles’	 eyes.	 They	 were
shocked	by	the	language,	the	tone	and	my	expression.	In	their	code,	leaders	had
to	 be	 polite,	 use	 civilized	 language,	 and	 hear	 discussions	 out	 before	 humbly
requesting	 everyone’s	 cooperation.	 I	 have,	 at	 the	 most	 conservative	 count,
violated	 at	 least	 five	 codes	 of	 Asura	 honour.	 But	 I	 did	 not	 care.	 No	 more
flowery	 language	 in	 chaste	 Tamil,	 no	 more	 elaborate	 rituals	 for	 me.	 I	 would
set	my	own	codes	and	those	who	wanted	to	could	come	with	me.

8	Maharaja
Ravana
I	 have	 noticed	 this	 man	 since	 the	 day	 he	 accompanied	 Sumali,	 though,
there	was	nothing	in	him	to	be	noticed.	He	was	one	of	those	low	cadre	soldiers
who	are	so	essential	in	any	army,	but	who	are	usually	thanklessly	forgotten.	He
was	always	trying	to	get	near	me.	He	wanted	to	get	something	across	badly.	I
called	him	and	asked	what	he	wanted.	I	should	have	done	so	weeks	ago	but	had
decided	 to	 impose	 distance	 between	 the	 officers	 of	 the	 army	 and	 the	 lower
ranks.	 Earlier,	 we	 three	 brothers	 would	 get	 drunk	 together	 with	 all	 our
comrades.	 But	 I	 had	 begun	 to	 feel	 uncomfortable	 with	 such	 a	 show	 of
camaraderie.
It	all	changed	when	my	uncles	came	with	th	fitie
The	 dark	 young	 man	 came	 up	 to	 me,	 bowed	 reverently,	 and	 placed	 the
refreshments	close	by.	I	did	not	want	to	look	at	his	face.	I	was	afraid	that	if	I
looked	hard	enough,	I	would	see	the	contempt	and	hatred	this	class	of	people
hid	behind	their	meaningless	servility	and	excessive	deference.	He	stood	close
to	 me	 for	 some	 time	 and	 when	 I	 did	 not	 acknowledge	 his	 presence,	 he	 left
silently.	 Why	 was	 I	 so	 concerned	 about	 whether	 they	 respected	 me	 or	 not?
Banishing	that	foul-looking	man	from	my	mind,	I	tried	to	concentrate	on	the
organizational	structure	for	the	army.
We	 had	 agreed	 on	 a	 council	 of	 ten	 officers,	 including	 my	 uncles
Prahastha,	 Sumali,	 Maricha,	 Jambumali,	 the	 erstwhile	 governor	 of	 East
Lanka’s	Pearl	Islands,	and	us	three	brothers.	There	was	also	Rudraka,	an	able
commando	from	Mahabali’s	elite	protection	wing	and	the	only	one	to	escape
alive,	 by	 masquerading	 as	 an	 alms	 seeker,	 when	 the	 army	 of	 Vamana	 Vishnu
attacked	 the	 Emperor;	 Dhumraksha,	 the	 man	 who	 was	 the	 supply	 and
distribution	 chief	 of	 Mahabali’s	 army	 and	 Vajradhamstra,	 the	 commander-in-

chief	of	Mahabali’s	forces.	There	were	other	minor	officers	who	commanded
smaller	units.	My	silence	ensured	that	I	was	chosen	as	commander-in-chief.	It
was	only	when	I	felt	the	exhilaration	and	relief	of	being	chosen	as	commander,
that	 I	 realized	 how	 much	 I	 had	 wanted	 the	 post.	 I	 sensed	 some	 restlessness	 in
Prahastha	and	Vajradhamsra,	but	they	and	the	others,	knew	they	were	not	up	to
the	task.	Six	years	of	battles	with	no	result	does	not	inspire	confidence	in	the
troops.	So	they	lost	out	and	accepted	it	like	gentlemen.
The	unspoken	agreement	was	that	every	decision	would	be	by	vote	and	I
would	only	be	a	token	chief.	We	Asuras,	unlike	the	Devas,	were	yet	to	evolve
an	 advanced	 level	 of	 political	 administration.	 This	 was	 an	 area	 in	 which	 I
wanted	to	emulate	the	Devas,	who	had	a	clear	administrative	system	where	the
king	or	Raja	was	the	supreme	ruler.	He	is	divinity	in	action,	the	living	God	on
earth,	 and	 he	 decides	 what	 is	 good	 for	 his	 subjects.	 The	 advantage	 is	 that
decisions	 are	 fast	 and	 implementations	 swift.	 The	 disadvantage	 is	 that	 with	 a
bad	 ruler,	 bad	 decisions	 are	 also	 implemented	 quickly	 and	 the	 country	 could
suffer.	 While	 we	 Asuras	 waited	 for	 our	 councils	 to	 reach	 a	 decision	 even
during	war,	the	Devas	took	our	country	from	us.
Anyhow,	my	assumed	divinity,	which	I	had	started	believing	in	since	I	was
lying	to	myself	quite	often	these	days,	stood	as	a	barrier	between	me	and	the
dark,	 stocky	 young	 man.	 I	 was	 rather	 confused	 and	 decided	 to	 discuss	 the
matter	 with	 Sumali.	 After	 all,	 the	 dark	 man	 could	 be	 a	 spy.	 He	 was	 watching
things	with	hawk’s	eyes	and	I	had	seen	him	find	chores	which	ensured	that	he
was	near	us	during	our	council	meetings.
I	 was	 sitting	 deeply	 immersed	 in	 my	 thoughts,	 unable	 to	 formulate	 any
concrete	plans	for	our	forthcoming	attack	on	Lanka.	I	could	feel	the	stress	and
wanted	 to	 smash	 something,	 or	 shout	 at	 someone,	 to	 clear	 my	 mind.	 I	 had
impulsively	 said	 that	 we	 should	 take	 Lanka	 from	 my	 step-brother.	 Now	 I
realized	that	the	move	did	not	make	much	sense.
Kubera’s	 palace	 was	 inside	 a	 well-guarded	 fort,	 atop	 Trikota,	 a	 huge
rocky	 mountain.	 Whatever	 sparse	 vegetation	 existed	 earlier,	 had	 been
destroyed	by	Kubera’s	security	forces	seven	years	ago:	when	Varuna,	a	pirate
who	 ruled	 the	 seas	 around	 the	 mainland,	 in	 a	 daring	 attack	 under	 cloud	 and
forest	cover,	nearly	kcovainland	captured	Lanka.	He	torched	the	city	and	took
hordes	 of	 gold	 and	 imported	 horses;	 silks	 and	 women	 from	 the	 palace.	 The
fort	was	made	impregnable	after	that,	with	all	the	vegetation	cut	from	the	hill
and	watch	posts	every	hundred	yards.	Mounted	guards	patrolled	the	streets	and
the	 beach.	 They	 were	 ruthless	 and	 efficient	 and	 numbered	 over	 a	 thousand.

They	 had	 successfully	 repelled	 Varuna’s	 attack	 thrice	 in	 the	 last	 seven	 years
and	even	succeeded	in	sinking	three	of	his	ships.	It	was	rumoured	that	Varuna
had	 moved	 to	 the	 eastern	 seas.	 Kubera	 even	 acquired	 a	 fleet	 and	 built	 a
powerful	 navy.	 These	 heavily	 armed	 ships	 patrolled	 the	 seas	 and	 piloted	 the
trade	ships	in	and	out	of	the	island’s	port.
But	more	than	the	strength	of	Kubera’s	army,	it	was	another	factor	which
sent	 shivers	 down	 my	 spine.	 My	 mother	 and	 sister	 were	 still	 living	 in	 that
dilapidated	shelter	at	the	edge	of	the	cliff,	overlooking	the	sea,	assuming	they
have	 not	 died	 of	 starvation	 or	 from	 the	 elements.	 If	 Kubera	 sensed	 that	 I
planned	such	mischief,	he	would	kill	my	kin	in	a	second	or	worse,	take	them
hostage.	I	did	not	have	a	standby	plan	for	that.	But	the	Council	had	decided	that
Lanka	should	be	taken	at	any	cost.	The	wealth	of	the	island	was	fabulous	and
would	help	us	raise	a	huge	army	and	navy	to	take	on	the	mainland.	No	other
conquest	would	help	us	raise	enough	forces	to	take	on	the	might	of	India.
“Sir,	 may	 I	 speak?”	 I	 gazed	 at	 the	 stocky,	 young	 man	 and	 was	 rather
irritated.	It	was	the	same	man	who	had	been	following	me	with	his	gaze	for	the
past	few	days.
“What	 do	 you	 want?	 Don’t	 you	 have	 anything	 better	 to	 do?”	 I	 was
surprised	at	my	own	harshness.
He	stood	there,	his	eyes	even	with	mine.	I	was	a	head	taller	than	him	but
he	looked	at	me	squarely.	There	was	no	threat,	neither	any	fear.	I	waited	for	his
eyes	to	fall,	for	him	to	cower	and	stare	at	his	own	toes.	But	the	man	before	me
showed	 no	 nervousness.	 The	 classical	 sign	 of	 an	 Asura	 faced	 with	 authority
was	 to	 fall	 on	 his	 knees	 and	 grovel.	 My	 race,	 in	 its	 march	 towards	 progress,
had	 forgotten	 that	 people	 can	 be	 equal	 and	 there	 was	 something	 called	 the
middle	 path.	 In	 this	 man,	 I	 met	 someone	 who	 could	 handle	 equality.	 I	 was
surprised	and	irritated	to	find	the	man	showed	no	fear	of	my	authority	and	did
not	act	humble.	It	was	absurd;	the	very	notion	that	he	was	my	equal	was	absurd.
Or	 was	 it?	 I	 had	 behaved	 just	 like	 him	 a	 few	 months	 ago,	 before	 Mahabali
discovered	me.
Then	I	understood.	I	saw	that	he	was	a	man	who	had	lost	everything	and
was	living	only	for	a	purpose.	There	was	something	inside	him	which	was	taut
and	ready	to	burst.	Here	was	a	man	who	could	control	his	emotions	and	merge
with	his	surroundings.	He	could	lie	still	like	a	cobra	in	the	grass	and	strike	with
deadly	 venom,	 attack	 with	 passion,	 soundlessly	 and	 ruthlessly.	 His	 eyes	 were
glassy	as	he	stared	at	me.	Suddenly	I	was	afraid.	My	hands	clenched	the	butt	of
my	sword,	ready	to	strike	if	this	cobra	made	any	move.	Without	any	warning,

he	shocked	me	by	falling	at	my	feet.
I	 was	 angry	 and	 relieved.	 Angry	 that	 he	 had	 shown	 the	 same	 Asura
behaviour	of	submitting	to	authority.	Relieved	because	I	did	not	want	to	fight
such	 a	 primitive	 force.	 There	 was	 something	 crude,	 raw	 and	 fresh	 about	 the
man.	He	was	the	original	force	of	nature,	the	very	salt	of	the	earth.	The	fact	that
he	was	an	ordinary	man	made	him	extraordinary.
“Trust	me,	your	Highness,	my	King;	I	shall	serve	you	better	than	anyone
ever	born.	I	shall	lay	down	my	life	for	you.	Make	me	your	servant.	I	know	you
are	our	saviour.	You	are	our	God-sent	king,	who	has	come	to	rescue	the	Asura
tribe	 from	 the	 clutches	 of	 the	 Devas.”	 He	 suddenly	 broke	 into	 sobs	 and	 his
whole	 body	 shook.	 I	 stood	 there	 embarrassed	 by	 the	 sudden	 display	 of
emotion.	He	clutched	my	legs.	I	did	not	know	what	to	say	or	how	to	react.	This
was	not	what	I	had	expected.	Then	I	saw	Prahastha	running	towa	k	rud	mrds	us
with	his	sword	drawn.	I	stopped	him	with	a	flick	of	my	fingers,	amazed	by	how
even	the	proud	Prahastha	stopped	abruptly	because	of	my	small	gesture.
How	 amazing!	 If	 more	 people	 fell	 at	 my	 feet	 like	 this,	 I	 might	 not	 only
start	enjoying	it	but	even	start	demanding	it.	The	initial	pity	had	vanished	and
was	replaced	by	a	love	mixed	with	contempt	for	the	hapless	human	being	lying
at	 my	 feet.	 I	 could	 feel	 that	 he	 was	 completely	 under	 my	 power.	 I	 could	 kick
him,	 drag	 him,	 and	 even	 behead	 him,	 and	 no	 one	 would	 raise	 a	 finger.	 I	 was
also	 terrified.	 What	 would	 happen	 to	 me?	 This	 kind	 of	 power	 came	 with	 the
burden	 of	 responsibility	 as	 King,	 to	 hear	 the	 woes	 of	 one’s	 subjects	 and	 find
solutions	to	their	problems.	I	would	do	that.	I	would	be	the	kindest	king	in	the
world.
I	raised	him	up	with	my	hands	and	stared	into	his	face.	His	eyes	were	red
and	I	thought	his	emotions	were	genuine.	But	I	could	not	fathom	the	depths	of
his	eyes.	The	sleepy,	glassy	eyes	were	like	those	of	a	snake.	Something	sinister
was	 lying	 dormant	 there	 and	 I	 was	 afraid	 to	 touch	 it	 lest	 the	 snake	 wake	 up.
“What	is	it	that	I	can	do	for	you?”	I	assumed	my	kindest	voice	and	wondered	if
the	pitch	was	rather	too	shrill	for	a	king.
“Your	Highness,	we	have	been	discussing	about	you	becoming	the	King
of	the	Asuras.	We	want	you	to	be	crowned	as	soon	as	possible.	All	the	soldiers
in	 the	 camp	 believe	 that	 you	 are	 the	 true	 successor	 of	 Mahabali	 and	 we	 want
you	to	lead	us.	I	come	as	a	representative	of	the	soldiers	who	are	willing	to	live
and	die	for	your	success.”
“You	are	aware	that	I	am	your	commander-in-chief	and	you	live	and	die
for	 our	 cause,	 just	 as	 I	 do.”	 My	 tone	 was	 severe,	 yet	 I	 couldn’t	 hide	 my

excitement.	The	rank	and	file	of	the	Asura	army	wanted	me	as	their	king.	The
Council	could	think	I	was	too	young	and	brash	for	such	a	responsibility	but	my
soldiers	wanted	me	as	their	leader	and	that	was	more	important.	I	was	uneasy
that	 I	 had	 thrust	 myself	 on	 the	 Council	 as	 its	 chief.	 Now	 this	 beautiful	 young
man	 was	 addressing	 me	 as	 king	 and	 not	 plain	 ‘Sir ’,	 as	 the	 soldiers	 address
their	superiors	in	the	Asura	army.	I	was	pleased	but	saw	Prahastha	wince	and
made	a	note	of	it	in	my	mind.
“Your	Highness,	we	want	you	to	be	our	King.	We	have	fought	enough	for
the	 Council.	 We	 lost	 every	 time	 because	 someone	 in	 the	 Council	 was	 not
beyond	treason.	We	want	a	King	like	that	of	the	Devas,	a	king	fit	to	rule	us	and
all	of	India	from	Lanka	to	Gandhara.	We	want	an	Emperor	to	rival	the	rule	of
Mahabali.	Nothing	short	of	this	great	dream	will	inspire	us,	your	Highness.	We
shall	be	happy	to	die	for	the	sake	of	the	great	Asura	empire	you	are	going	to
build.”
“We	will	have	to	discuss	the	matter	in	the	Council.	What	is	your	name?”
“Bhadra,	 your	 Highness.	 Bhadra	 from	 a	 village	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 the
Poorna.	 We	 shall	 await	 your	 decision,	 your	 Highness.	 Please	 forgive	 my
impropriety,	 but	 we	 had	 no	 other	 choice.”	 He	 walked	 backwards	 with	 all	 the
deference	due	to	a	king,	without	turning	his	back	on	me.	A	great	cheer	erupted
from	his	friends	waiting	a	little	way	away.
Prahastha	 came	 and	 put	 his	 hands	 on	 my	 shoulder.	 “Let’s	 call	 the
Council.”	His	voice	was	steely-toned	but	I	could	not	have	cared	less.	My	ears
were	 receptive	 to	 the	 slogans	 rising	 from	 the	 soldiers’	 camps,	 ‘Long	 live
Maharaja	Ravana!’
“The	Council	is	dismissed.”	I	smiled	at	the	shocked	face	of	Prahastha	and
added,	“You	are	my	Prime	Minister.”
I	walked	away,	leaving	Prahastha	to	ponder.	Somewhere	in	my	mind	I	felt
I	was	being	manipulated.	I	glanced	over	to	the	camps	and	saw	Bhadra	standing
alone,	 leaving	 the	 merriment	 to	 his	 comrades.	 There	 was	 a	 small	 trace	 of
triumph	 at	 the	 corners	 of	 his	 mouth.	 Our	 gaze	 met	 and	 the	 ke	 m	 Ther	 smile
vanished.	 He	 bowed	 low.	 I	 walked	 past	 the	 camp	 with	 what	 I	 believed	 to	 be	 a
royal	gait,	amidst	the	cheering	of	soldiers,	to	my	camp.	I	had	to	get	my	mother
and	sister	back	before	I	started	the	campaign.	That	was	my	last	thought	before	I
slipped	into	a	dreamless	sleep.

9	Maricha,	the	beloved
Ravana
I	saw	them	accompanying	my	uncle	Maricha.	My	sister	had	grown	up;	not
exactly	 pretty,	 but	 one	 could	 not	 miss	 the	 bubbling	 energy	 in	 her.	 I	 was	 in	 a
meeting	with	my	council	of	ministers.	It	was	no	longer	a	democratic	forum	but
I	made	sure	that	their	voice	counted.	It	was	a	charade	and	everyone	knew	my
wishes	would	be	carried	out	to	the	last.	But	the	Asura	need	for	a	good	debate
and	argument,	was	satisfied.
The	meeting	stopped	and	everyone	stood	up.	My	old	uncle	Maricha	was
smiling	and	waving	his	hands	at	us.	His	twins	were	tottering	behind,	followed
by	his	still-pretty	wife.	My	mother	and	sister	were	behind	them,	and	they	were
waiting	 for	 us	 to	 stop	 the	 all-important	 meeting	 to	 come	 near.	 Vibhishana
rushed	 to	 them	 like	 a	 lost	 puppy	 who	 has	 just	 found	 its	 mother,	 yelping	 and
shouting	with	joy.	I	also	wanted	to	run	and	embrace	my	mother	and	sister,	but
was	 not	 sure	 that	 kings	 behaved	 that	 way.	 Kumbha	 was	 running	 behind
Vibhishana	 and	 the	 twins	 ran	 towards	 him,	 screaming	 and	 laughing	 loud
enough	to	frighten	the	birds	perched	above	us	in	the	forest	canopy.	I	walked,	in
a	manner	I	considered	to	be	a	majestic	gait,	with	the	tall	and	dignified	figure	of
my	uncles	Prahastha,	and	the	ever-frowning	Sumali,	following	behind.
“Did	you	have	any	problems	on	the	way?”	Uncle	Prahastha	had	no	time
for	sentimental	niceties.
“Only	Varuna’s	dhows,	but	we	managed	with	a	small	gift.”
“He	 gave	 away	 Sulakshana’s	 pearl	 necklace	 to	 the	 pirates.	 She	 worked
hard	 for	 seven	 years	 in	 that	 Guild	 to	 earn	 it.”	 There	 was	 affection	 in	 my
mother ’s	 voice.	 Maricha	 shrugged	 his	 shoulders	 as	 if	 to	 say	 that	 giving	 the
pearl	necklace	to	pirates	was	an	act	of	no	significance.	I	touched	his	feet	and
embraced	him.

“So	 you	 have	 become	 the	 King	 eh?”	 My	 uncle	 back-slapped	 me	 hard.	 I
stood	 there	 grinning	 like	 a	 child	 who	 has	 just	 scored	 well	 in	 an	 oral	 exam.
“Now	we	have	to	find	you	a	kingdom.”
The	soldiers	laughed	and	I	fought	hard	to	keep	my	smile	in	my	face.	His
humour	 could	 be	 biting,	 but	 how	 I	 loved	 the	 old	 rascal.	 We	 vividly
remembered	 when	 as	 teenagers,	 my	 uncle	 and	 aunt	 coming	 to	 our	 battered
shack	with	two	babies	who	were	not	more	than	a	few	weeks	old.	It	was	one	of
those	 harsh	 monsoons	 and	 we	 fervently	 prayed	 to	 Shiva	 that	 the	 hut	 would
withstand	 the	 storm.	 They	 looked	 tired	 and	 worn,	 my	 uncle	 in	 rags,	 with	 a
bandaged	head	and	his	arm	in	a	sling,	and	my	aunt	smiling	despite	looking	like
someone	 who	 was	 about	 to	 fall	 down	 and	 die.	 They	 clutched	 the	 babies,	 one
each,	and	my	mother,	who	has	the	knack	of	understanding	without	words,	stood
up	and	took	both	babies	from	their	tired	arms.	We	shared	our	sparse	kanji	with
them	and	they	slept	the	whole	night	through.
The	 babies	 were	 too	 weak	 to	 cry,	 but	 I	 remember	 my	 mother	 worrying
about	their	feed.	My	aunt	was	past	the	age	of	having	babies	and	we	were	sure
the	children	had	been	adopted.	My	uncle	and	aunt	had	always	been	poor	after
he	 lost	 his	 kingdom,	 yet	 these	 kind	 acts	 came	 naturally	 to	 them.	 We	 did	 not
know	anyone	in	the	village	who	would	be	kind	enough	to	lend	us	some	milk.
Our	neighbours	were	too	poor	to	own	a	cow	and	milk	was	a	luxury.
As	usual	it	was	Kumbha	who	came	up	with	the	idea.	We	decided	to	steal
the	milk	from	the	only	man	who	owned	a	ne	m	Tme	up	wcow,	rather,	hundreds
of	cows.	It	was	difficult	but	possible.	The	danger	element	added	a	thrill	to	our
adventure.	 Vibhishana	 was	 reluctant,	 but	 did	 not	 protest	 for	 fear	 of	 being
branded	a	coward,	which	he	definitely	was.	He	agreed	to	stand	guard	and	warn
us	as	we	jumped	the	fence	and	entered	Kubera’s	stable.	It	was	pitch	dark	and	we
groped	around	the	stable	to	find	a	cow	to	milk.	None	of	us	had	any	experience
of	milking	cows.	The	stable	was	stinking	of	cow	dung	and	urine	and	those	big,
buzzing	mosquitoes	that	resemble	miniature	flying	tigers,	were	happy	to	taste
blood	in	the	early	morning	hours.	It	was	beginning	to	look	like	a	bad	idea	and
we	 wanted	 to	 get	 out.	 Someone	 coughed	 outside	 and	 our	 hearts	 jumped	 into
our	mouths.	We	heard	a	soft	whistle	and	panicked.	It	was	Vibhishana	warning
us	that	someone	was	coming.	We	ran,	but	lost	our	bearings.	The	cows	woke	up
and	 started	 bellowing.	 Torches	 were	 lit.	 They	 were	 heading	 straight	 towards
the	 stable.	 Somehow	 we	 got	 out,	 only	 to	 find	 ourselves	 trapped	 between	 the
palace	guards.	We	fought	and	knocked	down	a	couple	of	them,	but	were	soon
overpowered.	 They	 tied	 us	 up	 and	 then	 the	 beating	 started.	 They	 beat	 us	 with

clubs;	they	shattered	Kumbha’s	tooth;	and	burnt	us	with	torches.	We	howled	and
cried	 after	 a	 few	 minutes	 of	 attempting	 a	 dignified	 silence	 on	 being	 tortured.
The	beating	continued	till	daybreak.
When	 I	 woke,	 blood	 had	 caked	 on	 my	 face	 and	 every	 pore	 of	 my	 skin
hurt.	 Kumbha	 had	 woken	 earlier	 and	 was	 staring	 at	 me	 through	 his	 swollen,
black	 eyes.	 His	 face	 was	 a	 mess,	 with	 his	 nose	 and	 teeth	 knocked	 out	 and	 his
lips	cut.	He	winked	at	me	and	smiled	and	at	that	moment	I	loved	him	more	than
anyone	in	the	world.	I	knew	that	one	day	either	he	or	I	would	lay	down	our	life
for	 the	 other.	 I	 smiled	 back.	 We	 were	 tied	 to	 the	 stable	 pillars	 and	 left	 alone.
Then	 I	 wondered	 what	 had	 happened	 to	 Vibhishana	 and	 in	 that	 silent
communication	 between	 people	 who	 deeply	 love	 each	 other,	 I	 saw	 the	 same
question	on	Kumbha’s	face.	We	were	terrified!	We	looked	as	far	as	our	necks
could	stretch	to	see	if	Vibhishana	had	been	beaten	and	tied	to	a	pillar	like	us.
But	there	was	no	trace	of	him	and	we	were	sure	the	guards	had	beaten	him	to
death	 and	 buried	 him	 quietly.	 Or	 he	 had	 informed	 my	 mother	 or	 the	 village
elder	perhaps,	to	come	and	plead	with	Kubera	to	release	us.
We	had	not	attained	maturity	of	age	and	according	to	the	Asura	code	of
law,	we	could	not	be	jailed	nor	could	our	arms	be	chopped	off.	We	would	be
forced	 to	 work	 in	 Kubera’s	 oil	 mill	 or	 farm,	 as	 slaves	 for	 a	 few	 months.
Kubera	 the	 millionaire,	 found	 that	 this	 type	 of	 punishment	 made	 economic
sense	and	saved	him	a	few	coppers.	He	was	half-Gandharva,	half-Brahmin	and
not	Asura,	but	he	made	sure	he	followed	all	Asura	laws	–	non-interference	in
the	natives’	religion	and	beliefs,	he	called	it.	It	allowed	him	to	concentrate	on
trade	 and	 commerce.	 I	 saw	 Kumbha	 staring	 vacantly,	 silently	 praying	 for
Vibhishana	 to	 be	 alive.	 Tears	 were	 rolling	 down	 his	 cheeks	 and	 he	 made	 no
attempt	 to	 turn	 his	 face	 when	 he	 saw	 that	 I	 had	 noticed.	 My	 own	 eyes	 were
brimming	with	tears.
An	 old	 guard	 came	 and	 untied	 us	 and	 Kumbha	 collapsed	 onto	 the	 floor.
The	 guard	 lifted	 him	 roughly	 and	 called	 for	 help.	 I	 could	 barely	 walk.	 Two
guards	 carried	 Kumbha	 on	 a	 thick	 bamboo	 poll,	 like	 a	 wild	 beast	 which	 had
been	just	hunted	down.	It	was	almost	noon	and	the	air	was	hot	and	humid	at	the
peak	 of	 the	 monsoon	 season	 when	 the	 sun	 peeps	 out	 to	 bake	 the	 red	 muddy
earth	for	a	few	hours.
Kubera,	the	Money-God	and	the	giver	of	justice,	was	seated	on	his	throne,
busy	 signing	 palm	 documents	 with	 his	 royal	 stamp	 and	 barking	 instructions
about	 various	 vagaries	 of	 commerce,	 shipping	 rates,	 pepper	 prices,	 gold
equivalent	for	cardamom	weight,	etc,	which	would	be	carried	to	the	respective

officers	in	the	various	ports	of	the	island	and	then	back	to	the	merchant	king	by
messengers	 on	 swift	 Arabia	 s	 sw	 and	 wn	 horses.	 There	 were	 other	 criminals
waiting	for	the	God	of	money	to	dispense	wisdom	and	justice	but	in	this	world
of	high	profile	trade	and	commerce,	everything	else	was	insignificant.
I	saw	Kumbha	had	passed	out	and	was	afraid	I	would	follow	him.	I	wanted
to	 hear	 what	 our	 punishments	 would	 be	 for	 trespassing	 on	 the	 Money-God’s
property.	 It	 seemed	 like	 an	 endless	 wait	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 my	 life,	 I
pondered	 my	 mortality.	 I	 was	 too	 young	 to	 think	 about	 death,	 but	 with	 every
inch	of	my	body	hurting,	thoughts	of	death	came	easily.	It	was	then	that	I	saw
my	 uncle	 among	 the	 crowd,	 restlessly	 waiting	 for	 judgment.	 We	 made	 eye
contact	and	he	smiled	that	beautiful,	heart-warming	smile	that	made	me	forget
the	pain.	A	few	of	his	front	teeth	were	missing	but	I	could	feel	the	sincerity	of
the	man.	He	looked	concerned	and	at	the	same	time,	I	felt	that	with	him	around,
nothing	bad	could	happen	to	us.
Two	criminals	who	had	stolen	jewels	from	the	temple	were	the	first	to	go
on	 trial	 and	 before	 they	 could	 plead	 their	 innocence	 or	 the	 city	 police	 could
arrange	 proof	 for	 examination,	 Kubera	 pronounced	 them	 guilty	 and	 ordered
their	 arms	 chopped	 off.	 There	 was	 a	 loud	 wail	 from	 a	 woman,	 probably	 the
wife	of	one	of	the	men.	The	man	was	probably	a	craftsman	before	poverty	had
driven	him	to	steal	from	the	Gods.	Now	the	State	would	take	away	his	arms	and
the	 Gods	 would	 have	 their	 jewels	 back.	 Justice	 was	 exact	 and	 swift	 and	 the
crime	rate	low.
Kubera	was	an	efficient	ruler,	especially	for	the	trading	class,	who	were
assured	 of	 a	 safe	 city.	 His	 popularity	 among	 the	 middle	 classes	 was	 always
great.	The	rich	did	not	care	who	ruled,	as	long	as	they	were	allowed	to	be	rich.
The	poor	could	not	afford	to	care	and	nobody	asked	their	opinion	in	any	case.
Only	the	middle	class	mattered	and	any	half-witted	ruler	knows	how	to	pamper
them.	 One	 of	 the	 men	 offered	 himself	 as	 slave.	 He	 claimed	 he	 was	 an	 expert
weaver	 and	 said	 that	 he	 would	 weave	 for	 free.	 Kubera	 immediately	 reversed
the	sentence	and	the	weaver ’s	new	punishment	was	to	be	a	slave	for	the	next	ten
years	and	keep	weaving	and	making	money	for	the	establishment.
The	 next	 man	 was	 too	 proud	 and	 offered	 no	 apology	 or	 deal.	 He	 was
taken	away	for	his	arms	to	be	chopped	off.	In	any	other	country	he	would	have
begged,	 but	 as	 this	 was	 a	 prosperous	 country,	 begging	 was	 not	 allowed.
Beggars	 were	 banished	 to	 the	 interiors	 or	 more	 often	 taken	 to	 the	 sea	 and
drowned	with	stones	tied	to	their	necks.
“Next,”	a	soldier	stationed	near	the	throne	barked.	Kubera	was	looking	at

some	business	papers	in	the	meantime.	He	was	an	efficient	time	manager.	We
were	 shoved	 forward	 by	 the	 guards.	 “Accused	 of	 trespassing	 into	 the	 royal
cow	pens	and	attempted	theft	of	cows,”	barked	the	police	commissioner.
“Not	guilty,”	I	wanted	to	roar,	but	only	a	shrill,	boyish	sound	came	out.	A
sudden	 hush	 fell	 in	 court.	 Nobody	 has	 ever	 dared	 to	 speak	 in	 court	 when	 the
King	was	present.	Kubera	was	immersed	in	his	palm	leaves	and	it	took	him	a
few	 seconds	 to	 register	 the	 silence.	 He	 deliberately	 read	 through	 the	 entire
document	and	put	it	aside.	Then	he	raised	his	head.	A	smile	spread	across	his
face.	He	was	a	handsome	man	and	the	smile	made	him	more	so.	But	there	was
something	creepy	and	spider-like	in	his	movements.
“My,	my,	who	have	we	here?	My	beloved	step-brothers.	I	am	honoured.	If
you	 had	 asked,	 I	 would	 have	 gifted	 you	 a	 few	 cows.	 Instead,	 you	 wanted	 to
steal.	 How	 natural.	 I	 see	 you	 have	 taken	 after	 your	 mother.	 So,	 what	 do	 you
prefer,	your	arms	chopped	off;	your	noses	cut	off;	or	a	plain	simple	branding
on	your	cheeks	that	you	are	thieves?	I	cannot	be	blamed	for	nepotism.”
“Sir,	I	have	a	request.”	Maricha	walked	into	the	centre	of	the	court	and	a
hundred	 pairs	 of	 eyes	 bored	 into	 him.	 I	 believe	 he	 had	 broken	 se	 hquethe
elaborate	 Deva	 court	 decorum.	 These	 uncouth	 Asuras!	 They	 behave	 like
children.	It	is	perhaps	the	Deva’s	burden	to	civilize	us.	I	watched	with	horror	at
what	my	uncle	was	doing.	I	wanted	to	scream	at	the	top	of	my	voice	and	stop
him,	but	I	did	not	for	fear	of	punishment.	The	old	fool	was	blundering	on,	the
old	lovable	rascal.	I	felt	some	small	hope	that	we	might	be	let	off	easily.	“Sir,
these	are	children	and	they	scarcely	know	what	they	were	doing.”
I	 felt	 my	 cheeks	 growing	 hot	 as	 all	 eyes	 turned	 towards	 me	 to	 see	 the
foolish	boy.	I	was	sixteen	and	still	being	referred	to	as	a	child.	Even	if	I	got	out
of	this,	I	would	be	taunted	for	the	rest	of	my	life	by	my	friends.	I	had	missed	a
few	 sentences,	 immersed	 in	 my	 teenage	 wrath,	 and	 it	 took	 a	 while	 for	 the
enormity	of	what	my	uncle	was	saying	to	sink	in.
“So	 you	 offer	 yourself	 in	 return	 for	 the	 freedom	 of	 these	 ugly	 brats?	 I
hope	you	are	not	in	an	extended	state	of	inebriation	from	last	night’s	revelry
and	that	you	are	saying	it	of	your	own	free	will.	You	say	you	are	a	soldier,	but
you	have	a	few	missing	teeth	and	an	arm	in	a	sling	to	prove	that.”	The	laughter
in	 the	 court	 echoed	 around	 us	 and	 my	 cheeks	 burned	 when	 I	 saw	 my	 uncle
standing	 there	 with	 his	 right	 arm	 in	 a	 sling,	 dignified,	 his	 eyes	 staring	 at	 a
distant	point	a	few	inches	above	the	fool	who	was	playing	the	buffoon	king.
“Six	 years	 in	 the	 oil	 mill.”	 The	 order	 passed	 like	 a	 lightning	 bolt	 and	 I
shivered.	 Kumbha	 showed	 signs	 of	 waking	 up.	 I	 could	 see	 that	 even	 Maricha

was	 shocked.	 This	 was	 too	 harsh	 for	 a	 small	 trespass.	 I	 could	 see	 tears
sprouting	 from	 the	 old	 man’s	 eyes.	 I	 could	 see	 the	 face	 of	 his	 wife	 and	 the
twins.	I	had	brought	this	upon	the	old	man.	How	old	was	he?	Thirty,	thirty-five
perhaps?	At	sixteen,	everyone	over	twenty	looked	old.	Six	years	meant	that	he
would	be	fourty-one	by	the	time	he	got	out.	That	is,	if	he	made	it	at	all.	The	oil
mill	was	the	most	dreaded	of	all	punishments.	Instead	of	bulls,	men	were	tied	to
the	mill	and	walked	round	and	round,	grinding	sesame	seeds	or	copra	into	oil.
It	sapped	the	life	out	of	them.	Twenty	hours	of	back-breaking	labour,	365	days
multiplied	by	six,	for	the	old	man.	Just	because	his	hot-headed	nephews	could
not	 help	 playing	 heroes	 and	 trespassed	 on	 the	 premises	 of	 their	 step-brother,
the	merchant-king.
“And	add	one	year	more	so	that	this	old	bastard	learns	how	to	address	a
king.	Sir,	indeed!	Next.”
I	heard	this	with	horror.	This	was	justice.	Fast	and	swift.	For	contempt	of
court,	my	old	uncle	got	one	more	year	of	slave	labour.	My	uncle	stared	at	his
toes.	The	guards	came	and	handcuffed	him.	He	was	then	bound	in	chains	and
shoved	 hard	 by	 the	 guards.	 People	 laughed.	 My	 people,	 the	 Asuras,	 laughed
when	one	of	their	kin	was	treated	like	an	animal	for	no	fault	of	his.	Someone
whistled.	We	were	dragged	out	of	court	and	dumped	outside.	The	State	had	no
use	for	us	anymore.	Our	bones	were	broken	and	our	internal	organs	damaged.
So	 we	 were	 discarded	 like	 gnawed	 chicken	 bones.	 Chewed	 out	 by	 the	 State.
Then,	the	first	stone	hit	me.	Soon	it	turned	into	a	hail.	My	people	were	stoning
me	for	sending	my	old	uncle	to	hard	labour.	Their	impotent	wrath	was	falling
on	two	teenagers.	So	this	is	the	end,	I	thought.	Dying	ignobly	as	a	thief	at	the
hands	of	my	people,	after	sending	my	lovable,	old	uncle	to	prison.	What	an	end
to	a	fool	who	dreamt	of	conquering	the	world	and	freeing	his	people.
The	 pelting	 of	 stones	 stopped	 as	 suddenly	 as	 it	 had	 started.	 With	 blood
dripping	from	 my	face,	I	saw	my	mother	weeping	inconsolably	 and	hugging
the	 inert	 form	 of	 Kumbha.	 Fortunately,	 our	 citizens	 had	 yet	 to	 reach	 those
heights	 of	 civilization	 when	 they	 stone	 women	 to	 death.	 Thank	 god	 for	 the
small	mercies	he	showers	on	our	life.	Slowly	we	were	carried	into	our	hut.	My
aunt	lay	unconscious	and	the	twins	were	wailing.	My	neighbour,	sMy	how	a	fat,
ugly	 lady,	 who	 had	 a	 heart	 of	 gold,	 but	 the	 tongue	 of	 a	 serpent,	 desperately
tried	 to	 stop	 the	 wailing.	 It	 was	 then	 that	 I	 saw	 Vibhishana	 sitting	 in	 a	 corner
and	reading	a	book	in	Sanskrit	and	not	even	looking	at	us.	I	boiled	with	rage.
So	the	guards	had	not	buried	him.	The	studious,	good	boy	had	come	home	and
slept	 while	 we	 were	 getting	 thrashed.	 Then,	 when	 the	 uncle	 who	 was	 past	 his

prime	has	been	dragged	to	the	oil	mill	to	work	with	the	bulls,	the	bastard	was
sitting	and	chanting	some	obscure	Deva	text	like	a	frog.
I	felt	like	murdering	him	there	and	then.	I	wanted	to	shove	that	book	of	the
Rig	Veda	down	his	throat.	I	wanted	to	do	so	many	things,	when	he	caught	my
eye.	He	came	and	sat	on	the	floor	at	my	feet.	I	tried	to	raise	my	leg	and	kick	his
hateful	face.	Instead,	a	groan	escaped	me.	Kubera’s	guards	knew	where	to	kick.
Then	 Vibhishana	 broke	 down	 like	 a	 baby.	 He	 hugged	 my	 feet	 and	 oh	 God,	 it
hurt	like	hell.	 But	he	would	not	let	it	go.	The	bastard	wanted	forgiveness.	He
said	 he	 was	 afraid	 and	 it	 took	 him	 the	 greater	 part	 of	 the	 morning	 to	 get	 the
courage	 to	 tell	 my	 uncle.	 He	 was	 sorry	 for	 everything	 and	 wanted	 his	 big
brother	to	forget	and	forgive	and	hug	him.	I	wanted	to	get	up	and	tear	him	in
two.	I	tried	to	sit	up.	I	made	some	gurgling	sound	which	might	have	frightened
my	 mother.	 She	 left	 Kumbha	 and	 came	 to	 me.	 Then	 she	 soothed	 my	 raging
mind	with	songs	of	my	long-past	childhood.	She	sang	as	if	I	was	a	baby	still	in
the	cradle,	searching	her	nipples	for	milk.	She	sang	those	old	songs	of	Asura
valour	 and	 the	 sad	 songs	 of	 long-lost	 glory.	 I	 slept,	 with	 love	 replacing	 the
hatred	I	had	felt	for	my	younger	brother.	When	I	woke,	my	rage	had	gone.
I	knew	that	my	aunt	had	left	the	village	the	next	day	and	a	message	came
which	said	that	that	she	had	joined	a	weaver ’s	guild.	The	pay	was	not	good	but
the	guild	provided	a	roof	and	two	square	meals	a	day.	Not	the	life	for	a	former
queen	of	a	small	Asura	state,	but	certainly	better	than	a	hut	with	the	night	view
of	the	stars	and	moon	through	the	roof.
I	 was	 seeing	 my	 family	 after	 a	 long	 time,	 thanks	 to	 this	 old	 man	 with	 a
cheeky	smile,	who	thought	nothing	of	handing	over	a	pearl	necklace	for	which
his	wife	had	sweated	for	seven	years,	to	arrange	safe	passage	for	his	sister ’s
family;	or	about	grinding	sesame	in	a	tyrant’s	prison	so	that	his	nephews	could
go	free.	The	old	 rascal	had	lost	a	few	more	teeth,	but	looked	healthier	than	I
had	 last	 seen	 him,	 in	 chains.	 It	 seemed	 that	 he	 would	 outlive	 us	 all.	 He	 was
forty-two	 now,	 but	 remained	 the	 same	 kind	 and	 jovial	 fellow.	 A	 king	 in	 his
time,	he	will	remain	a	kind-hearted	uncle	always	ready	to	sacrifice	his	life	to
save	those	who	he	loved.	I	shall	always	remember	that.

10	The	pearl	island	beckons
The	 Council	 had	 assembled	 under	 the	 Banyan	 tree.	 I	 presided	 over	 the
meeting,	 with	 Prahastha	 as	 moderator,	 and	 the	 debate	 raged	 on.	 No	 one	 was
making	 any	 sense.	 Everyone	 wanted	 to	 somehow	 take	 Lanka,	 but	 no	 one
seemed	to	have	a	concrete	idea	how	to	do	it.	Kumbha	wanted	a	frontal	attack
where	we	would	cross	the	sea	during	low	tide	in	bamboo	canoes	and	challenge
Kubera’s	army	head	on.	I	knew	we	would	not	last	an	hour.	We	were	less	than
2000	 people	 and	 more	 than	 half	 were	 inexperienced	 warriors.	 They	 had	 the
passion	to	fight	but	knew	next	to	nothing	about	using	arms.	The	best	seemed	to
have	 only	 shot	 wood	 pigeons	 in	 the	 forest.	 A	 few	 others	 had	 been	 in	 various
highway	raids.	There	was	 no	 doubt	that	 the	only	ones	with	any	experience	in
real	combat	were	Prahastha,	Sumali,	and	Maricha.	But	that	was	years	ago	and
military	technology	had	changed.
Bhadra	 passed	 in	 and	 out	 of	 the	 meeting	 place,	 carrying	 refreshments.	 I
felt	uneasy	in	his	presence	as	he	was	a	vMy	ho	hut	withlways	on	the	verge	of
saying	something.	I	didn’t	want	a	servant	to	interrupt	the	council	of	ministers
and	offer	his	unsolicited	war	strategy.	I	also	did	not	want	anyone	to	know	I	had
spoken	with	him	once	in	a	while,	when	no	one	was	around.	Many	of	the	things
he	said	made	sense	and	some	of	the	ideas	I	put	forth	as	my	own,	were	actually
his.	It	was	surprising	that	no	one,	including	myself,	had	thought	about	the	fact
that	 our	 army	 would	 not	 last	 long	 once	 we	 moved	 out	 of	 this	 forest,	 until
Bhadra	drew	my	attention	to	it.	This	forest	abounded	with	game,	wild	berries,
mangoes	and	jackfruit,	so	we	never	needed	to	worry	about	feeding	the	troops.
Once	 we	 moved	 out,	 we	 were	 sure	 to	 starve	 to	 death.	 After	 that,	 we	 started
collecting	 jackfruits	 and	 drying	 them	 in	 the	 sun,	 making	 mango	 pastes,
cultivating	wild	rice	and	bamboo	shoots,	and	storing	these	meagre	rations.
We	also	got	our	armaments	ready	and	resorted	to	making	wooden	spears,

swords	 and	 arrows,	 as	 copper	 or	 iron	 was	 hard	 to	 come	 by.	 Maricha	 had
started	 a	 brewery	 for	 poisonous	 potions,	 which	 could	 be	 effectively	 used	 in
spears	and	arrows.	But	this	was	all	insignificant.	The	fall	of	Kubera	had	to	be
through	 a	 sudden,	 surprise	 attack.	 He	 had	 a	 standing	 army	 of	 20,000	 men,
4,000	 mounted	 archers,	 2,000	 horse	 chariots,	 500	 elephants,	 and	 supplies	 to
last	two	years.	He	had	an	effective	navy	with	more	than	twenty	ships	patrolling
the	shores	and	two	huge	snake-boats,	each	rowed	by	sixty	men.	Sixty	archers
could	 be	 mounted	 on	 these	 swift	 and	 sleek	 snake-boats	 and	 they	 shot	 flame
arrows	 with	 deadly	 precision.	 His	 training	 schools	 were	 famed	 far	 and	 wide
and	the	swordsmanship	of	his	soldiers	was	envied	by	other	kings.
Of	 course,	 Kubera	 could	 afford	 all	 these	 things.	 He	 could	 hire	 the	 best
talent	 from	 across	 the	 world,	 whether	 from	 China	 or	 Egypt	 or	 even	 the	 pale
barbarians	from	colder	lands.	He	could	use	the	latest	technology	for	his	army
and	 navy.	 It	 was	 even	 rumoured	 that	 he	 had	 developed	 a	 flying	 machine	 and
was	 going	 to	 make	 fifty	 more,	 so	 that	 he	 could	 employ	 them	 to	 drop	 huge
flaming	balls	or	stones	on	enemy	camps.	 It	was	also	 rumoured	that	 only	one
prototype	 had	 been	 made	 and	 the	 technician	 who	 designed	 it	 had	 been
poisoned.	I	forced	my	mind	back	to	the	debate.
“We	 need	 horses	 and	 have	 to	 get	 them	 from	 across	 the	 sea,	 so	 we	 also
need	ships,	or	at	least	large	dhows.	The	question	is,	how	many	can	we	afford?”
asked	Prahastha.	A	debate	ensued	on	the	number	of	horses	needed,	the	number
archers	to	be	deployed,	the	number	of	ships	required,	the	timing	of	the	attack.
My	 mind	 drifted	 away	 again	 and	 it	 was	 then	 that	 I	 caught	 Bhadra’s	 eye.	 He
beckoned.	 I	 was	 irritated.	 Perhaps	 he	 thought	 that	 he	 had	 something	 better	 to
offer	 than	 these	 veteran	 soldiers?	 I	 would	 have	 to	 put	 him	 in	 his	 place.	 But	 I
thought	 it	 was	 better	 to	 hear	 him	 out	 first	 and	 walked	 away	 as	 if	 enjoying	 a
stroll,	towards	the	waterfall.	The	fall	was	huge	here	and	the	Poorna	was	almost
500	 feet	 wide,	 where	 she	 fell	 a	 majestic	 200	 feet	 to	 meet	 the	 river	 and	 then
flowed	to	the	distant	sea.	On	a	clear	day,	one	could	spot	the	sea	bordering	this
land	 of	 coconuts.	 All	 around	 was	 thick,	 evergreen	 tropical	 forest,	 with
hundreds	 of	 colourful	 birds	 chirping	 and	 flying	 about.	 Dragonflies	 fluttered
over	the	water.	At	night,	when	everyone	was	asleep	except	the	sentries,	I	would
listen	to	the	forest.	The	occasional	elephant	herd	rummaged	through	the	forest;
the	distant	roars	of	leopards	and	tigers;	bears	drinking	from	the	stream.	It	was
a	 different	 world	 out	 there.	 The	 drama	 of	 survival	 took	 place	 all	 around	 my
camp,	 with	 life	 hunting	 or	 being	 hunted	 in	 turn.	 Violence	 was	 the	 very
foundation	 of	 nature.	 Every	 moment	 something	 became	 prey	 to	 something

else.	The	circle	of	killing	went	on.	Could	man	stop	it?	Wars	are	inevitable,	so
is	cruelty.	Most	animals	are	successful	killing	machines.	The	humble	lizard	on
the	wall	is	no	less	a	hunter	than	a	tiger.
“Your	 Highness,	 can’t	 we	 go	 in	 as	 traders?”	 Bhadra’s	 voic	 {adrd	 one
shocked	me.	I	had	not	heard	him	approaching.	He	walked	silently	for	a	short
and	stout	man.
“And	what	would	we	trade	in?”	I	could	not	help	asking.
“We	could	arrange	for	horses	from	the	Arabs	in	Muzuris.	We	could	get
pepper	 from	 the	 hills,	 rubies	 from	 the	 east	 coast,	 and	 gold	 from	 the	 Greek
camp	in	Muzuris.	We	could	get	some	ships	on	lease	from	the	rich	traders…	We
could	navigate	around	the	peninsula	and	enter	Lanka	from	the	South-	Eastern
tip	 of	 India,	 where	 the	 sea	 is	 narrowest.	 Two	 ships	 would	 do,	 carrying	 about
400	people.	.	.”
“And	 you,	 fool,	 you	 plan	 to	 conquer	 Lanka	 with	 400	 nitwits?”	 I	 could
barely	contain	my	anger.
Bhadra	 waited	 for	 my	 temper	 to	 subside	 and	 then	 continued,	 “The	 ships
could	 carry	 ivory	 and	 pearls	 back	 and	 about	 twenty	 men	 each.	 They	 could
continue	to	the	mainland	and	trade	again.	The	rest	could	visit	the	king	and	ask
to	set	up	a	guild	on	the	coast,	preferably	near	the	Eastern	gate	of	the	Trikota
fort,	near	the	weavers’	street.”
I	was	warming	up	to	his	idea.	“In	six	trips,	we	would	have	sneaked	all	the
men	 onto	 the	 island.	 We	 could	 buy	 arms	 from	 the	 local	 market	 and	 hoard
them.”
“No	 need	 for	 six	 trips,	 Your	 Highness,	 that	 would	 take	 too	 much	 time.
Once	 the	 first	 lot	 has	 been	 placed,	 we	 could	 send	 a	 few	 hundred	 in	 small
canoes,	 ten	 or	 fifteen	 in	 each	 batch,	 as	 fishermen.	 The	 second	 trip	 of	 ships
could	 unload	 more	 soldiers	 and	 they	 could	 form	 a	 second	 guild	 near	 the
northern	gate.	If	we	carry	on	like	that,	we’d	be	able	to	place	half	our	army	in	a
month.	In	the	third	sailing,	we	could	purchase	horses	and	arms	only	and	anchor
outside	 the	 ports	 in	 the	 deep	 sea,	 at	 a	 distance	 of	 an	 hour,	 if	 the	 wind	 is
advantageous.”
I	liked	the	plan.	I	needed	just	enough	money	to	fill	my	two	ships.	I	could
manage	that.	But	even	for	this,	I	would	have	to	borrow	heavily	from	Mahabali.
I	 did	 not	 know	 whether	 the	 old	 man	 would	 agree.	 Otherwise,	 I	 would	 be	 left
with	no	choice	other	than	to	plunder	one	or	two	ships	in	the	high	seas.	It	was	a
risky	 venture	 and	 we	 could	 encounter	 Varuna’s	 ships,	 which	 ran	 a	 protection
racket	in	these	parts,	or	Kubera’s	navy.	I	doubted	whether	half	the	men	in	my

army	 could	 swim,	 let	 alone	 fight	 in	 the	 seas.	 Most	 were	 inlanders	 and	 would
see	the	sea	for	the	first	time	in	their	lives.	I	knew	the	plan	would	be	vetoed	in
the	Council	by	Prahastha,	and	I	would	have	to	overrule	him.	I	did	not	want	any
unpleasantness	at	this	early	stage.
“I	want	to	go,	Your	Highness.”	I	thought	he	was	asking	to	go	back	to	the
servant	quarters.	I	flicked	my	hand	and	became	immersed	in	my	own	thoughts.
“I	want	to	go	to	Lanka	first,	Your	Highness.”	I	was	jarred	and	turned	my
head	to	stare	at	him.
“What	made	you	think	that?”
“I	will	be	useful	to	you	there.”
He	was	going	to	be	a	spy.	He	made	a	funny	figure	as	he	stood	there	with
bow	 legs,	 pot	 belly,	 curly	 hair,	 dark	 as	 midnight	 and	 without	 the	 least	 bit	 of
respectability.	He	had	a	natural	camouflage,	he	was	common	among	common
people.	He	would	blend	in	like	a	chameleon.	Was	he	going	to	desert	the	camp?
Was	he	Kubera’s	spy	and	leading	us	into	a	trap?	Suddenly,	I	felt	paranoid.	I	told
him	he	was	not	going	anywhere.	I	wanted	to	talk	to	him	at	night	and	he	could
leave	 in	 the	 morning.	 He	 was	 rather	 uneasy	 and	 I	 could	 see	 that	 he	 was
perturbed.	‘I	cannot	leave	you	so	easily,	friend.	There	is	something	fishy	about
you,’	I	wanted	to	tell	him.	Instead,	I	smiled	at	him.	I	was	shocked	at	how	easily	I
could	lie.
Bhadra	was	confused.	I	thought	something	in	my	demeanour	had	set	off
alarm	bells	in	his	subconscious.	I	had	to	watch	this	fe	{watemeallow	carefully.
He	could	be	dangerous,	I	warned	myself.	I	walked	briskly	and	he	followed	me
with	slow,	deliberate	steps.	I	could	see	him	pondering	his	future	action.	I	had
my	arm	on	my	sword	hilt,	ready	to	draw	and	cut	off	his	head	in	a	clean	sweep.	I
walked	into	the	Council	and	presented	my	idea,	actually	Bhadra’s	plan,	but	by
now	I	had	started	thinking	of	it	as	my	own.	It	could	have	been	due	to	my	inborn
leadership	 qualities	 that	 this	 stealing	 of	 a	 subordinate’s	 idea	 and	 claiming
credit	 for	 it,	 came	 easily	 to	 me.	 Those	 were	 still	 early	 stages	 and	 I	 could
recollect	whose	ideas	they	were.	Later,	much	later,	I	became	a	real	leader,	and
then	I	was	sure	that	all	good	ideas	emanated	from	me	and	the	bad	and	foolish
ideas	had	some	other	father.	The	Council	launched	into	furious	debate.	I	raised
my	hand	and	it	took	a	few	minutes	for	them	to	notice	and	then	they	stopped.	In
those	 early	 days	 I	 had	 yet	 to	 acquire	 the	 quality	 of	 silencing	 people	 with	 a
glance	or	by	just	raising	my	eyebrows.
Prahastha	immediately	raised	an	objection.	“This	is	too	dangerous.	What
if	 there	 is	 a	 spy	 among	 us?	 What	 if	 the	 very	 first	 batch	 gets	 arrested	 and

executed?	 Moreover,	 it	 is	 a	 sly	 method.	 That	 is	 not	 the	 Asura	 method	 of
fighting.	We	fight	as	men,	prudence	dictates	that	we	wait	until	we	gain	enough
means	and	men	to	fight.	But	when	we	do,	we	will	fight	like	warriors.	This	is	a
stupid	way	of	doing	things,	Ravana.	I	am	surprised	at	you.”
It	 was	 irritating	 when	 he	 took	 that	 patronizing	 tone.	 Also,	 he	 was	 not
using	the	honorific	and	was	calling	me	by	my	name	in	Council,	forgetting	that
I	was	the	king	and	he,	a	mere	Prime	Minister.	Of	course,	he	was	my	uncle	and
could	 call	 me	 anything	 in	 private.	 In	 public,	 he	 had	 to	 maintain	 decorum,	 or
else	the	entire	system	I	was	trying	to	build	would	collapse	like	a	pack	of	cards.
Maricha	 stood	 up	 and	 said,	 “No,	 Prahastha,	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way.	 The
plan	the	boy	has	shared	with	us	is	excellent	and	we	should	back	that.	We	Asuras
have	 always	 lost	 because	 we	 played	 by	 the	 rules,	 when	 nobody	 else	 bothered
about	any.	But,	we	have	to	watch	out	for	spies.	That	means	we	have	to	cut	all
communication	with	strangers.	Still,	I	know	someone	could	leave	a	small	palm
leaf	 in	 a	 tree	 hole	 for	 a	 contact	 to	 collect	 it	 later.	 But	 we	 have	 to	 take	 our
chances.”
I	 wanted	 to	 make	 sure	 my	 uncles	 did	 not	 patronize	 me	 by	 calling	 me	 a
boy.	It	was	demeaning.	But	these	people	were	so	valuable	to	me	that	I	could	not
protest.	Even	if	I	had	protested,	they	would	only	have	become	confused.
“Arrest	this	fellow.	I	want	no	execution,	but	only	a	detention.	Do	not	let
him	 out	 of	 this	 camp,”	 I	 told	 them	 and	 clapped	 my	 hands.	 Two	 soldiers	 with
long	 spears	 came	 running.	 My	 uncles	 looked	 perplexed	 and	 so	 did	 my
brothers.	The	soldiers	bowed	low	before	me.	One	of	them	had	the	lace	of	his
kurta	 tied	 wrong.	 Oh	 God,	 how	 am	 I	 going	 to	 take	 these	 fools	 to	 fight,	 these
slouchy	beggars?	He	saw	my	eyes	darting	down	from	his	face	and	he	crouched
lower	 as	 if	 paying	 me	 more	 respect,	 but	 really	 to	 avoid	 my	 eyes	 seeing	 the
sloppy	way	he	had	dressed.	“Arrest	Bhadra,	but	do	not	harm	him.	Give	him	the
maximum	security	and	watch	him.	Tell	him	the	King	has	ordered	this	for	his
protection.	Now	go.”	I	barked	out	the	orders	and	they	rushed	out.
I	 had	 the	 vague	 feeling	 that	 I	 had	 done	 something	 wrong	 but	 pushed	 it
away	into	a	recess	of	my	mind	and	tried	to	concentrate	on	the	debate.	Sumali
agreed	 with	 the	 expedition.	 I	 noticed	 with	 pleasure	 that	 Prahastha	 was	 fast
getting	isolated.	Then	I	saw	Vibhishana	stand	up.	He	rarely	spoke,	so	anything
he	 said	 carried	 some	 weight	 in	 the	 Council.	 However,	 I	 had	 found	 that	 he
usually	 spoke	 about	 unnecessary	 and	 uncomfortable	 things	 and	 was	 a	 pain	 in
the	neck.	He	gave	a	moral	twist	to	things	and	made	everyone	uneasy.	It	was	as
if	 your	 grand	 consciousness	 was	 hoveri	 {ss	 in	 ng	 over	 you	 and	 shaking	 its

head	 in	 dismay	 at	 your	 slightest	 pleasure.	 Vibhishana	 was	 someone	 who
constantly	researched	the	right	way	to	live,	so	much	so,	that	he	had	forgotten
how	 to	 live.	 He	 was	 a	 walking	 rulebook,	 with	 lots	 of	 obscure	 and	 utterly
useless	jargon	and	mumbo	jumbo.	I	do	not	know	why	my	hair	stood	up	every
time	 this	 pompous	 brother	 of	 mine	 spoke.	 It	 was	 duty	 to	 protect	 him.	 I	 loved
him	but	somehow,	his	actions	were	irritating.	He	made	me	and	the	others	feel
small,	as	if	he	was	the	only	son	born	of	virtue	and	the	rest	of	us	were	bastard
children.	 Perhaps	 this	 was	 an	 affliction	 that	 came	 from	 reading	 too	 many	 of
those	philosophical	books.	If	you	read	them	a	lot,	you	started	believing,	not	in
yourself	 but	 in	 the	 lifeless	 words	 of	 complicated	 arguments	 that	 lay	 between
the	 pages.	 But,	 I	 also	 had	 a	 soft	 corner	 for	 my	 youngest	 brother.	 Vibhishana
had	yet	to	grow	up.	He	believed	that	no	evil	existed	in	the	world.	Though	I	got
riled	 every	 time	 he	 went	 on	 and	 on	 about	 dharma,	 my	 affection	 for	 my	 little
brother	always	stopped	me	from	being	too	harsh	to	him.
Vibhishana	began,	 “I	don’t	think	we	 should	cheat	anyone.	We	should	go
and	ask	Kubera	whether	he	is	willing	to	give	us	a	portion	of	his	kingdom	and
some	 money	 to	 start	 our	 campaign	 against	 the	 Devas.	 We	 should	 put	 this
money	 to	 good	 use	 and	 then,	 with	 our	 half-brother ’s	 help,	 we	 should	 start
negotiations	with	the	Deva	kingdoms	of	North	India…”
Kumbha	guffawed	at	this	suggestion.	“We	can	also	ask	Kubera	if	he	will
share	 his	 wives	 with	 us.	 With	 them	 we	 can	 start	 a	 pleasure	 business	 to	 gain
more	 money.	 Then	 we	 can	 negotiate	 with	 the	 Devas	 and	 ask	 them	 if	 they	 can
put	some	investment,	say	their	sisters	or	mothers,	in	our	Asura	brothel	service
guild,	 and	 then	 we	 can	 sit	 and	 calculate	 profit	 percentages.	 Eventually	 all	 the
Devas	and	Asuras	will	share	the	same	pit	and	become	brothers	and	live	happily
after.”	Kumbha	clutched	his	belly	and	rolled	around	on	the	ground.	I	could	not
contain	my	merriment	either	and	laughed	out	loud.	Even	Prahastha	could	not
hold	 back	 a	 smile	 and	 the	 grave	 Sumali’s	 mouth	 twitched	 at	 the	 corners	 with
the	hint	of	a	smile.	Vibhishana	stood	there	with	a	blank	expression	in	his	face,
as	if	he	had	expected	these	silly	comments	from	a	boor	like	Kumbakarna.
“Please,	please,	can	we	at	least	stick	to	using	civil	language?”	Prahastha
was	again	the	moderator	and	slowly	the	laughter	died	off.	Vibhishana	sat	down
in	his	seat	and	became	immersed	in	his	deep	thoughts	or	at	least	he	gave	us	the
impression	 that	 he	 was	 deep	 in	 thought.	 Finally,	 after	 a	 lot	 of	 deliberation,	 it
was	 decided	 that	 we	 would	 stick	 to	 the	 original	 plan	 of	 getting	 two	 ships.
Prahastha,	along	with	Dhumraksha	and	Vajradhamstra,	were	to	go	to	Mahabali
and	ask	for	money	to	take	two	ships	on	lease	from	the	merchants	in	the	port	of

Muzuris.	 It	 was	 also	 decided	 that	 the	 destination	 would	 be	 kept	 a	 secret	 from
anyone	 outside	 the	 Council,	 and	 that	 both	 ships	 together	 would	 carry	 about
1,000	 people.	 Maricha	 suggested	 that	 the	 ships	 be	 redesigned	 to	 have	 secret
chambers	and	a	deck	where	the	men	and	arms	could	be	concealed.	Messengers
would	 be	 sent	 to	 get	 engineers	 from	 the	 Mayan’s	 school	 on	 the	 east	 coast	 of
India,	to	alter	the	ships.	Maricha	would	lead	that	team.
Kumbha	 and	 Vibhishana	 were	 to	 accompany	 Prahastha’s	 delegation	 and
once	the	money	was	arranged,	they	were	to	buy	the	horses.	Maricha	was	also	to
collect	rubies	and	diamonds	from	the	east	coast,	not	real	stones	but	fake	gems
shaped	by	the	Mayans;	a	few	gold	bricks,	again	fake,	were	also	to	be	obtained
from	 the	 east	 coast.	 Maricha	 would	 accompany	 Kumbha	 and	 Vibhishana	 to
Mahabali	 and	 take	 his	 share	 of	 the	 money	 for	 his	 purchases.	 Rudraka,
Jambumali,	and	I,	would	stay	back	and	train	the	troops.	I	respected	Jambumali
a	lot.	This	man,	who	started	as	a	billing	clerk	in	a	spice	depot	and	had	risen	to
the	post	of	Governor	of	Lanka	under	Mah	{nkae	troopabali,	deserved	respect.	I
had	to	develop	a	second	and	third	rung	of	leaders	for	effective	combat.	There
was	 a	 lot	 of	 work	 to	 do.	 It	 was	 a	 big	 gamble	 we	 were	 taking,	 but	 we	 did	 not
have	any	choice.

11	Traitor
Bhadra
Tears	sprouted	 in	my	eyes.	I	cried	like	a	baby	by	the	time	I	reached	my
camp.	They	did	not	believe	me.	Worse,	they	called	me	a	spy.	The	two	guards
who	 were	 on	 either	 side	 of	 me	 until	 I	 reached	 my	 camp,	 proved	 it.	 I	 was
surprised	to	find	my	camp	mates	had	moved	out.	I	was	imprisoned.	The	guards
were	quite	nice	to	me	–	too	nice	for	comfort.	I	cried	for	a	long	time.	I	wept	for
my	 wife	 and	 daughter,	 for	 my	 country	 and	 race.	 I	 moaned	 for	 the	 group	 of
people	who	had	followed	my	master,	trusting	him	with	their	lives.	I	cried	for
the	fact	that	I	was	no	longer	human,	but	a	vampire	thirsting	for	the	blood	of	the
Devas.	I	wailed	for	the	dark	depths	my	soul	had	fallen	into.
I	had	to	get	out	of	this	place.	My	King	needed	my	service	but	he	did	not
know	 that.	 I	 could	 not	 be	 kept	 chained	 like	 an	 old	 dog	 while	 my	 country
prepared	for	war.	I	had	to	reach	Lanka.	I	peered	outside.	It	was	a	dark	and	silent
night.	Somewhere,	deep	inside	the	forest,	an	owl	hooted.	Was	it	a	dark	omen,	a
harbinger	 of	 things	 to	 come?	 It	 chilled	 my	 spine.	 The	 two	 guards	 were
chatting.	There	were	guards	on	the	periphery	of	the	camp	as	well.	The	roar	of
the	waterfall	was	loud	but	it	was	just	a	background	sound	which	we	got	used	to.
I	had	to	take	advantage	of	it.	If	I	could	reach	the	stream,	I	could	follow	it	down
by	 climbing	 the	 rocks	 on	 the	 sides	 of	 the	 fall.	 It	 would	 be	 slippery	 and
dangerous	 but	 I	 was	 sure	 I	 could	 do	 it.	 I	 had	 climbed	 such	 rocks	 when	 I	 was
younger,	to	gather	honey.	Of	course,	I	was	fitter	then.	But	now,	my	need	was
greater.	So	it	balanced	out,	at	least	I	hoped	so.	Once	I	reached	the	river,	I	could
use	 a	 canoe	 or	 a	 tree	 trunk	 and	 flow	 downstream.	 The	 swift	 flow	 would	 take
me	 to	 the	 sea.	 By	 daybreak	 I’d	 have	 to	 leave	 the	 river	 and	 follow	 its	 course
upland.	I	could	once	again	catch	up	with	the	river	by	hitch-hiking	to	Muzuris
and	then	taking	one	of	the	rice	boats	going	to	the	port.	But	I	had	to	act	fast.

I	made	a	hole	in	the	tent	with	a	small	kitchen	knife.	I	wanted	to	take	my
sword	but	it	was	too	heavy.	Bows	and	arrows	were	out	of	the	question.	I	was
not	 sure	 if	 some	 crocodiles	 would	 take	 a	 fancy	 to	 my	 plump	 body.	 But	 there
were	no	crocodiles	found	near	the	fall.	The	swift	current	and	lack	of	fish	kept
them	 away.	 I	 got	 out	 and	 looked	 around.	 My	 heart	 missed	 a	 beat.	 There	 was
only	one	guard.	Where	was	the	other	one?	The	tall,	lanky	fellow	with	the	dirty
kurta?	I	did	not	want	to	fight	him.	It	would	wake	the	others.	Besides,	I	was	not
sure	if	I	could	win	the	fight.	Then	I	saw	him	under	a	tree,	whistling	while	he
peed.	 His	 back	 was	 towards	 me	 but	 he	 would	 turn	 once	 he	 had	 finished	 his
business.	I	prayed	that	he	had	drunk	a	lot	of	water	or	toddy.	I	ran.	The	rustling
of	dry	leaves	were	like	thunderclaps	to	my	ears.	Once	I	reached	the	woods,	I
looked	back.	The	guard	was	standing	erect,	holding	his	spear,	ready	to	throw	it.
He	had	heard	something.	The	other	guard	had	come	and	lit	a	torch.	I	could	see
both	 guards	 in	 the	 ghostly	 torch	 light.	 These	 guards	 were	 alert.	 One	 wrong
move	and	I	would	dangle	like	a	boar	on	their	spear.
Then,	I	saw	the	shorter	guard	gaping	at	the	hole	I	had	made.	Run!	Every
nerve	 in	 my	 body	 became	 taut.	 It	 took	 a	 few	 seconds	 for	 the	 guard	 to
comprehend	 what	 had	 happened.	 Then	 he	 began	 to	 shout.	 His	 voice	 was
agitated	 and	 terror	 gripped	 me.	 Lots	 of	 torches	 were	 lit.	 A	 small	 drizzle	 had
started	and	I	heard	a	change	in	the	sound	of	the	water.	The	flow	had	increased.
The	waterfall	was	more	furious	now	and	its	sound	drowned	what	the	soldiers
were	saying.	Then	I	saw	the	king	coming	out	of	~nkae	incrhis	camp.	He	had	his
sword	drawn.	Should	I	rush	to	him	and	say	that	I	was	his	servant	and	friend?	I
was	 tempted	 to	 do	 so.	 The	 tension	 was	 killing	 me.	 I	 saw	 his	 face	 in	 the
flickering	light	of	the	torches.	I	was	not	so	sure	anymore.	It	was	a	cruel	face,
not	at	all	kind,	as	I	had	imagined.	He	looked	like	a	man	possessed	by	the	devil.
The	wind	had	grown	stronger	now	and	was	howling	through	the	trees.	His	dark
curly	 hair	 flew	 like	 the	 mane	 of	 a	 galloping	 horse.	 He	 looked	 like	 a	 demonking.	I	was	afraid	of	him.	I	was	also	afraid	of	the	surging	waters	of	the	river.
Of	the	two	evil	forces	of	nature,	I	chose	the	river.
I	ran,	hoping	that	the	sound	of	my	running	feet	would	not	be	carried	in	the
howling	wind.	An	arrow	flew	inches	above	my	head.	I	knew	that	there	was	no
time	to	clamber	down	the	rocks.	My	life	was	at	stake.	On	one	hand	it	was	sure
death.	My	people,	who	I	wanted	to	serve,	were	shooting	arrows	at	me.	On	the
other	 hand,	 my	 beloved	 river	 Poorna,	 was	 inviting	 me	 with	 millions	 of
surging,	frothing	hands.	I	plunged	into	the	river	without	a	second	thought.	The
freezing	cold	when	my	body	hit	the	water	was	shocking.	I	could	not	keep	my

head	up.	The	rain	was	falling	like	iron	pins.	I	was	carried	away	like	a	dead	leaf
on	the	swift	current,	sinking	in	the	water,	coming	up,	only	to	go	down	again.
Then,	suddenly,	before	I	knew	it,	I	was	falling,	descending	and	plunging	into
dark	 depths.	 There	 was	 a	 roaring,	 moving	 pillar	 of	 white	 water	 all	 around
which	 kept	 me	 pressed	 down,	 not	 letting	 go	 of	 me.	 The	 Poorna	 struggled	 to
swallow	me.
When	I	opened	my	eyes	I	was	floating	on	a	log.	The	sky	had	cleared	and
the	 roar	 of	 the	 waterfall	 was	 distant.	 I	 did	 not	 know	 when	 and	 how	 I	 had	 got
hold	of	the	log.	It	was	a	miracle	that	I	had	escaped.	I	had	a	mission	to	fulfil	and
that	was	why	the	Poorna	chewed	me	but	didn’t	swallow	me	completely.	Every
single	joint	in	my	body	hurt.	I	checked	my	head	for	any	injury	and	found	that	it
was	slimy	and	warm.	There	was	blood	flowing.	Blood!	Blood	would	attract	the
crocodiles.	I	was	in	crocodile	territory.	Did	they	hunt	at	night?	I	did	not	know
and	 did	 not	 want	 to	 find	 out	 either.	 I	 needed	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 water	 but	 the
current	was	swift.	I	swam	towards	the	shore	without	letting	go	of	the	log.	It	was
exhausting.	Suddenly,	I	saw	something	moving	in	the	water.	Had	the	crocodiles
come	for	their	dinner?	For	a	late	night	snack	of	a	poor,	dark	Asura?	I	was	not
sure	if	they	could	run	and	catch	their	prey	on	land	but	definitely	land	was	safer.
Safer	 as	 long	 as	 there	 were	 no	 leopards.	 I	 would	 worry	 about	 leopards	 and
tigers	and	snakes	if	I	reached	land.
The	dark	moving	thing	came	closer.	I	kicked	hard.	I	had	but	a	few	feet	to
go	when	something	hit	my	leg.	This	was	it.	This	was	the	end.	After	escaping	the
Deva	armies,	the	Asura	arrows,	and	a	mighty	waterfall,	I	was	going	to	end	up
as	 a	 late	 night	 snack	 for	 some	 ugly,	 long-nosed	 reptile.	 I	 waited	 for	 the
powerful	jaws	to	snap	on	my	leg	but	nothing	happened.	I	was	too	terrified	to
look	back.	Too	frightened	to	swim	and	reach	the	shore.	I	hung	onto	my	log	and
waited.	A	pale	moon	made	its	appearance	in	the	wet	sky.	It	could	have	been	an
hour	or	two	or	maybe	even	a	few	seconds,	I	do	not	know.	But	when	I	looked
back,	it	had	gone.	Without	a	trace.	I	wanted	to	cry	with	joy.	Then	I	saw	it	again.
It	 was	 caught	 in	 the	 small	 overhanging	 branch	 of	 tree.	 It	 was	 no	 crocodile
which	 had	 waited	 under	 my	 feet	 but	 a	 small	 canoe!	 Someone	 must	 have
followed	me	and	the	Poorna	had	taken	care	of	him.	All	this	time	I	was	worried
about	crocodiles,	when	I	had	men	chasing	me	in	canoes.	I	could	have	got	the
canoe	when	it	was	literally	at	my	feet.
I	swam	towards	the	canoe	carefully.	I	didn’t	want	ripples	to	move	it.	I	had
almost	caught	it	before	a	strong	wind	shook	the	branch	and	set	the	canoe	free.	I
swam	 with	 all	 my	 might	 to	 catch	 it	 before	 it	 caught	 the	 drift.	 But	 it	 was	 too

swift	for	me.	I	thrashed	about,	ignoring	my	pain	and	the	rain	which	had	started
pounding	me	 again.	Fng	reeinally,	when	I	had	almost	given	up,	the	canoe	got
caught	 in	 a	 whirlpool.	 After	 a	 lot	 of	 twists	 and	 turns,	 it	 miraculously	 shot
towards	 me.	 It	 almost	 knocked	 my	 head	 off	 but	 I	 ducked	 underwater	 and
grabbed	hold	of	it	before	the	canoe	could	go	past.	I	clambered	up	and	balanced
in	it.	Then	exhaustion	overcame	me	and	I	collapsed	on	my	back.	As	the	canoe
swirled	and	bounced	on	its	way	towards	the	great	sea,	I	slept.

12	The	wait
Ravana
Almost	two	months	had	passed	but	no	one	had	returned	except	the	search
parties	who	were	supposed	to	have	hunted	down	the	spy.	That	night	we	had	lost
three	 men	 in	 the	 swirling	 waters.	 The	 chief	 of	 the	 guards,	 a	 pale,	 burly,
corpulent	 man,	 suggested	 that	 the	 river	 had	 swallowed	 Bhadra.	 The	 search
party	had	found	the	bodies	of	two	of	the	three	guards	a	mile	downstream,	halfeaten	by	fishes	and	jackals.	Perhaps	the	crocodiles	had	eaten	up	Bhadra	and	the
other	guard,	whose	name	no	one	seemed	to	know.	I	hoped	the	spy	was	dead,	but
it	 was	 somehow	 difficult	 to	 believe	 that.	 He	 seemed	 immortal.	 There	 was
something	 in	 him,	 some	 raw	 power	 that	 defied	 death.	 I	 was	 afraid	 he	 had
betrayed	our	plans.
The	endless	wait	was	frustrating.	Boredom	had	set	in	among	my	soldiers.
Rudraka	 drilled	 the	 soldiers	 with	 a	 dedication	 bordering	 on	 cruelty.	 By	 late
evening	they	were	tired	and	slept	like	stones.	It	reduced	the	liquor-induced	fistfights	and	 slovenly	limericks.	 I	 separated	300	men	who	showed	promise	 and
selected	thirty	captains.	I	made	the	units	as	small	as	possible	for	swiftness	and
flexibility.	 Each	 team	 had	 ten	 members,	 including	 the	 captain.	 They	 were
trained	to	use	swords	and	clubs	scientifically,	free-arms	combat,	close	combat
with	knives,	and	climbing	walls.	I	also	designed	uniforms	for	them,	with	pitch
black	turbans	and	black	dhotis.	They	were	to	travel	light	with	a	small	iron	club
and	a	light-weight	sword,	a	rope	tied	around	their	waist	and	a	dagger	hidden
inside	the	rope.	The	men	were	physically	fit	even	before	the	selection	and	after
two	 months	 rigorous	 training,	 their	 dark	 bodies	 gleamed.	 They	 were	 good
specimens	to	watch,	the	epitome	of	Asura	manhood.
I	 had	wanted	Vajra	to	stay	 back	but	Prahastha	thought	Vajra	had	a	better
chance	 of	 getting	 Mahabali	 to	 lend	 us	 the	 money.	 Jambumali	 was	 a	 good

administrator	but	in	the	kind	of	operation	we	were	planning,	his	contribution
would	 be	 limited.	 Men	 like	 Jambu	 would	 be	 assets	 when	 our	 kingdom	 had
stabilized	 and	 then	 men	 like	 Vajra	 or	 Rudraka	 would	 become	 dangerous
liabilities.	I	gave	Jambu	charge	of	the	weapon	kilns.	He	had	to	arrange	enough
metal	 and	 get	 swordsmiths	 and	 ironsmiths	 to	 make	 swords	 and	 arrows.	 The
actual	 production	 though,	 was	 overseen	 by	 Rudraka.	 We	 discarded	 the	 heavy
iron	 spears	 normally	 used	 by	 the	 Asuras.	 And	 the	 heavy,	 wooden	 clubs	 were
exchanged	for	lighter	ones	with	copper	thorns	jutting	out.	A	single	blow	from
a	heavier	club	could	splinter	the	skull	but	it	was	too	clumsy	and	needed	men	of
extraordinary	physical	strength	to	use	it	effectively	and	swiftly.	A	small	lightweight	 club	 which	 could	 be	 lifted	 and	 swung	 like	 a	 sword,	 would	 be	 more
suitable	to	carry	and	use	in	close	combat.
Rudraka	 and	 I	 had	 sat	 together	 for	 hours	 under	 our	 Banyan	 tree,
discussing	new	innovations	in	our	armaments.	I	wanted	to	get	rid	of	the	six	feet
bow	 and	 heavy	 iron	 arrows.	 They	 were	 too	 unwieldy.	 Rudraka,	 as	 man	 with
vision,	was	against	the	idea.	He	agreed	that	we	could	reduce	the	heavy	archers
as	 the	 forthcoming	 operation	 would	 require	 stealth	 and	 speed	 and	 not	 raw
power.	But	he	did	not	want	them	completely	discarded.	He	explained	that,	in	the
not-so-distant	 future,	 when	 we	 had	 established	 a	 kingdom	 with	 forts	 for	 our
protection,	archers	with	heavy	bows	could	shardower	arrows	on	attackers	and
even	 pierce	 the	 head	 of	 an	 elephant.	 I	 agreed	 with	 him	 after	 he	 explained	 the
logic.	But	for	the	forthcoming	raid,	they	would	remain	on	the	ship.
Rudraka	 was	 a	 man	 of	 vision,	 and	 his	 life	 was	 not	 just	 dedicated	 to
warfare.	 He	 was	 married	 to	 arms-technology	 and	 had	 travelled	 far	 and	 wide
and	 seen	 the	 huge	 catapults-on-wheels	 used	 by	 the	 Greeks.	 His	 attempts	 to
recreate	 the	 same	 design	 had	 failed.	 But	 the	 genius	 of	 the	 man	 lay	 in	 his
innovations.	His	catapult	could	not	carry	heavy	stones	for	a	long	distance,	so
he	 decided	 they	 could	 be	 used	 to	 hurl	 oil-filled	 coconut	 shells,	 loosely	 held
together	with	jackfruit	paste.	When	the	shells	hit	an	object,	the	oil	would	spill
out.	This,	followed	by	flame-tipped	arrows,	would	ensure	that	everything	that
stood	in	its	path	would	be	engulfed	in	flames	in	a	matter	of	seconds.	He	also
redesigned	the	Naga	astra,	the	poison	arrows	used	by	the	Nagas,	by	drilling	a
tiny	hole	in	the	tip,	where	a	small	amount	of	poison	could	be	stored,	making	it
all	 the	 more	 deadly.	 Then	 Rudraka	 made	 arrows	 like	 those	 used	 by	 Varuna.
They	 were	 poles	 actually,	 thrown	 by	 a	 machine	 from	 a	 ship’s	 deck,	 which
could	 sink	 another	 ship	 when	 it	 was	 struck.	 We	 were	 getting	 extremely
confident	about	our	engineering,	but	our	supply	was	running	short.	Unless	our

envoys	returned	within	a	week,	we	would	be	stuck	with	a	few	thousand	arrows,
clubs	and	swords	for	about	half	my	troops.
Rudraka	had	collected	all	the	old,	rusted	weapons	from	the	soldiers	and
melted	them	to	make	new	arms.	There	was	a	lot	of	wastage	and	this	annoyed
Jambumali.	 There	 were	 frequent	 wars	 of	 words	 and	 I	 had	 to	 intervene.	 But	 I
trusted	 Rudraka	 and	 he	 once	 again	 came	 up	 with	 a	 path-breaking	 idea	 which
was	 brilliant	 in	 its	 simplicity.	 He	 designed	 bamboo	 arrows	 with	 copper	 tips.
The	 bamboo	 shaft	 was	 filled	 with	 poison	 which	 was	 then	 sealed	 with	 a	 paste.
On	impact,	the	film	broke	and	the	poison	penetrated	the	victim’s	blood	system,
killing	him	instantly.	The	idea	was	so	simple	that	we	were	wondered	why	we
had	not	used	it	earlier.	Aborigines	used	bamboo	arrows,	but	the	Asuras	and	the
Devas	regarded	them	as	toys.	This	saved	us	a	lot	of	metal.	Rudraka	also	used
stones	as	hard	tips	for	spears	and	arrows,	which	saved	even	more	metal.	By	the
time	he	had	finished,	we	had	more	than	enough	weapons.
Then	 Rudraka	 decided	 to	 design	 armour	 for	 the	 few	 elephants	 we	 had
captured	and	tamed.	He	sewed	needle-sized,	poison-filled	iron	spikes	into	the
clothing	 which	 covered	 the	 elephants’	 head	 and	 sides.	 The	 elephants	 now
resembled	huge	porcupines.	Our	elephants	would	prove	deadly	to	any	enemy
elephant	coming	near	them.	Our	army	was	reasonably	well	trained.	The	flabby
men	we	saw	before	had	almost	disappeared.	There	were	surprise	attack	drills
every	day	and	any	lapse	was	dealt	with	severely.	But	what	was	worrisome,	was
the	cavalry.	We	did	not	have	a	single	good	horse.
Even	if	my	delegates	brought	back	horses,	we	did	not	have	enough	time
to	train	 them.	We	had	to	attack	immediately	after	the	 monsoon	 and	the	 island
had	 to	 be	 taken	 before	 the	 commencement	 of	 the	 retreating	 monsoon	 which
would	break	over	the	island	in	less	than	a	month.	Once	the	retreating	monsoon
set	in,	the	sea	would	become	very	rough	and	I	was	not	sure	if	the	leased	trade
ships	 would	 be	 able	 to	 withstand	 the	 fury	 of	 the	 waves.	 And	 only	 God	 could
save	us	if	we	ran	into	Varuna	and	his	fleet	of	ships	en	route.	He	would	gobble
us	up	in	a	matter	of	hours.	So	we	waited	for	our	ships	and	the	horses.	I	worried
about	 my	 delegation.	 But	 more	 than	 that,	 I	 worried	 about	 the	 traitor	 who	 had
escaped.	 If	 Kubera	 has	 been	 forewarned,	 we	 could	 look	 forward	 to	 spending
the	rest	of	our	lives	grinding	oil	for	him.

13	Lanka’s	welcome
Bhadra
I	woke	with	the	sun	burning	my	eyes.	My	body	ached	and	I	felt	nauseous.	I
raised	 my	 head	 and	 squinted	 at	 the	 slowly	 flowing	 water.	 It	 was	 slowly
meandering	about	palm-fringed	lands.	There	was	a	lot	of	activity	on	both	sides
of	the	river.	I	could	see	many	barges	and	rice	boats	plying	in	both	directions.
There	 were	 paddy	 fields	 with	 farmers	 tilling	 the	 soil.	 A	 magical	 village	 tune
floated	through	the	air.	In	my	previous	life,	I	would	have	stopped	and	enjoyed
the	scenery.	I	would	have	jumped	into	the	water	and	swum	across	the	river.	The
toddy	here	would	have	been	delicious.	The	girls	more	so.	I	could	see	seagulls
and	Brahminy	kites	soaring	in	the	distant	skies	towards	the	west.	I	was	nearing
the	mouth	of	the	river.	At	any	moment	I	would	see	the	lighthouse	of	Muzuris;
an	 ancient	 light-tower	 which	 had	 weathered	 thousands	 of	 monsoons	 and	 led
travellers	and	ships	from	across	the	world	to	her	wonderful	city.
The	 river	 took	 a	 slow	 right	 turn	 and	 there	 it	 was.	 The	 port	 city	 of
Muzuris,	 the	 timeless	 city,	 once	 Mahabali’s	 capital,	 the	 centre	 of	 art	 and
culture,	 the	 most	 cosmopolitan	 city	 in	 the	 world.	 Greeks,	 Romans,	 Syrians,
Sumerians,	Mesopotamians,	Chinese,	Arabs,	Jews,	Devas,	various	Asura	tribes
and	 Egyptians,	 had	 their	 own	 streets	 and	 places	 of	 worship.	 There	 were
different	 trade	 guilds.	 Calico,	 peacocks,	 monkeys,	 pepper,	 cardamom,
cinnamon,	 cotton,	 rice,	 clothes,	 gold,	 horses,	 precious	 stones,	 silk	 were
exported	from	here.	The	ancient	city	was	buzzing	with	activity.
I	left	the	canoe	and	jumped	into	the	water	which	was	delightfully	warm.	I
climbed	ashore	and	walked	to	the	nearest	inn.	People	were	staring	at	me.	I	must
have	looked	a	sight.	It	was	an	old	shack,	small	but	neat,	with	a	palm-thatched
roof.	There	were	a	few	people	loitering	about,	mostly	sailors.	I	needed	to	take
a	 bath	 and	 have	 a	 doctor	 see	 to	 my	 wounds.	 The	 inn-keeper	 was	 kind	 and	 I

think	he	believed	the	story	of	my	rice	boat	sinking	in	the	heavy	rain.	It	looked
as	if	this	inn	was	frequented	by	people	who	had	survived	the	fury	of	nature.	He
gave	me	a	set	of	new	clothes	and	got	a	doctor ’s	assistant	to	dress	my	wounds.	I
promised	to	repay	him	by	working	for	him	for	a	few	days.
It	was	hard	work	and	I	had	to	draw	water	from	a	deep	well,	hew	wood	for
fuel	and	sweep	the	floors.	I	was	just	happy	to	be	alive.	I	hadn’t	forgotten	why	I
had	left	the	camp	but	I	needed	a	rest.	I	thought	I’d	build	contacts	and	then	board
a	ship	bound	for	Lanka.	And	it	was	at	the	inn	that	I	found	I	had	a	talent.	Quite	by
accident	 I	 discovered	 that	 I	 was	 a	 good	 cook.	 It	 was	 just	 something	 that
happened	 one	 day	 when	 the	 cook	 of	 the	 inn	 vanished	 without	 a	 word.	 There
were	 many	 guests	 and	 I	 volunteered	 to	 cook.	 In	 no	 time,	 I	 built	 a	 reputation.
‘Bhadra’s	Fried	Fish’	became	a	must	for	evening	revelries.	They	said	my	spicy
fish	fry	went	well	with	toddy.	Soon	I	started	getting	invitations	from	captains	of
various	ships.	But	I	knew	I	had	to	be	patient.	I	waited	until	I	got	a	suitable	offer
from	 one	 of	 Kubera’s	 ship	 bound	 for	 Lanka.	 It	 was	 a	 royal	 pleasure	 ship,	 a
huge,	sturdy	vessel	that	was	considered	safe	even	in	turbulent	monsoon	seas.	It
carried	officers	and	their	wives	to	the	major	ports	of	the	world	to	shop.	I	was
an	instant	hit	with	them	and	before	I	reached	Lanka,	I	had	employment	offers
from	a	dozen	aristocratic	families.	But	I	had	to	choose	my	employer	with	care.
I	wanted	to	be	inside	the	palace.	I	was,	after	all,	a	self-appointed	spy.	I	wanted	to
collect	 as	 much	 data	 and	 send	 it	 back	 to	 my	 king.	 So	 I	 slyly	 struck	 up	 a
friendship	with	one	of	the	cooks	of	the	royal	kitchen.	He	was	a	lean,	dark	man
of	indeterminate	age	and	wanted	a	helper	to	cut	vegetables	and	dress	meat	and
fish.	He	was	sure	that	he	could	persuade	the	chief	cook	to	employ	me.	I	thought
I	would	take	a	chance	with	him	as	this	would	get	me	into	the	inner	circles	of	the
palace.	Wild	plans	had	started	racing	in	my	mind.
I	 landed"-1ould	 in	 Lanka	 after	 six	 days	 of	 travel.	 The	 ship	 had
circumvented	the	peninsula	and	the	northern	tip	of	Lanka,	before	anchoring	at
the	main	port,	near	the	capital	of	Trikota.	I	could	see	Kubera’s	glittering	palace
atop	the	Trikota	hills.	I	saw	watch	posts	with	armed	guards.	The	royal	highway
stretched	 from	 the	 port	 to	 the	 main	 gate	 on	 the	 eastern	 side,	 with	 beautiful
gardens	and	trees	lining	either	side.	The	western	and	southern	sides	of	the	fort
had	 many	 shanty	 towns	 where	 the	 city’s	 poor	 lived	 and	 worked	 in	 the	 trade
guilds,	 that	 stretched	 miles	 to	 the	 north.	 Public	 parks	 and	 lakes	 adorned	 the
beach	 in	 the	 north.	 The	 eastern	 side	 had	 inns	 for	 visiting	 sailors.	 There	 were
houses	of	pleasure	where	pretty	girls	offered	wine,	toddy	and	their	bodies,	to
men	 willing	 to	 pay.	 The	 royal	 guards	 patrolled	 the	 streets	 on	 fine	 Arabian

horses.	I	had	never	seen	a	city	like	Trikota.	Muzuris	was	bigger	and	busier,	but
it	 lacked	 the	 charm	 of	 Trikota.	 Muzuris	 was	 a	 city	 of	 intricate,	 narrow	 and
winding	 roads,	 bustling	 with	 commerce	 and	 choking	 it.	 It	 was	 crowded	 and
congested,	 like	 a	 collection	 of	 huge	 village	 markets.	 There	 were	 no	 visible
exhibitions	 of	 wealth	 and	 of	 course,	 there	 weren’t	 any	 shanty	 towns	 on	 the
outskirts	like	in	Trikota.	I	sensed	that	the	poor	were	dumped	at	the	outskirts	of
Trikota	 to	 present	 a	 clean	 and	 neat	 city	 in	 the	 commercial	 parts	 of	 town.
Anyhow,	 the	 effect	 was	 nothing	 short	 of	 spectacular.	 Any	 visitor	 would	 have
been	impressed	by	Trikota	and	the	palace	atop	the	hill.
I	 was	 apprehensive	 about	 my	 welcome	 at	 the	 fort.	 I	 walked	 a	 few	 paces
behind	my	friend	from	the	ship,	when	I	was	gripped	by	sudden	fear.	A	palace
guard,	astride	a	tall	,dark	horse,	was	staring	at	me.	It	was	as	if	he	was	trying	to
recollect	something.	I	tried	hard	to	remember	his	face.	It	was	vaguely	familiar,
but	 I	 could	 not	 place	 him.	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to	 lock	 eyes	 with	 him.	 There	 was
something	 sinister	 about	 him.	 My	 friend	 was	 chattering	 incessantly	 and
occasionally	turning	back	to	urge	me	to	hurry	as	it	was	nearing	sunset	and	the
fort	gates	closed	then.
We	 reached	 the	 fort	 gate	 manned	 by	 four	 armed	 guards.	 They	 looked
professional,	with	taut	muscles	and	long	limbs.	I	was	taken	aside	and	searched
for	any	hidden	weapons.	I	almost	fainted	when	they	found	my	kitchen	knife	in
the	folds	of	my	dhothi	and	made	me	stand	aside.	My	friend	explained	that	I	was
a	 professional	 cook	 and	 it	 was	 required	 for	 my	 profession,	 but	 they	 shoved
him	out	along	with	his	other	friends.	I	sat	in	one	corner	of	the	guard	room	and
was	 left	 alone	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 I	 gathered	 that	 they	 were	 waiting	 for	 their
superior	 officer	 to	 come	 and	 that	 I	 might	 be	 subjected	 to	 some	 sort	 of
interrogation.	 As	 the	 moments	 passed,	 my	 fear	 increased.	 What	 where	 they
going	 to	 do?	 I	 wanted	 it	 to	 get	 over	 with.	 It	 was	 almost	 midnight	 and	 I	 was
nearly	 dead	 with	 fear,	 when	 a	 tall,	 dark	 man	 entered	 the	 room.	 Three	 guards
stood	behind	him	reverently.	He	was	evidently	their	superior.	He	went	directly
to	his	table,	and	put	his	seal	in	a	couple	of	palm	leaves,	and	then	called	for	the
messenger	boy.	Once	the	courier	was	dispatched,	he	turned	towards	me.
It	 was	 the	 same	 man	 who	 had	 been	 staring	 at	 me	 when	 I	 was	 walking
behind	 my	 friends	 from	 the	 ship.	 There	 was	 the	 trace	 of	 a	 smile	 on	 his	 face,
which	made	him	look	hideous.	My	heart	was	in	my	mouth.	He	walked	towards
me	 and	 in	 one	 swift	 moment,	 without	 any	 warning,	 kicked	 my	 face.	 I	 was
thrown	back	and	lay	coiled	there,	expecting	more	blows	and	kicks.	I	wanted	to
scream.	He	picked	me	up	by	my	shoulders	and	peered	into	my	eyes.	The	stench

of	cheap	toddy	mixed	with	his	bad	breath	hit	me.	It	was	worse	than	his	kick	and
I	felt	like	vomiting	in	his	face.	He	gave	me	a	backhanded	slap	and	I	tasted	the
warm	 blood	 in	 my	 mouth.	 Then	 he	 threw	 me	 down.	 “I	 have	 seen	 you
somewhere,	you	son	of	a	swine.”
I	recognized	him	then.	He	was	with	the	gang	that	had	attacked	my	village.
This	walla
“I	have	seen	you	somewhere	else.”At	that	moment	the	door	opened	with	a
blast	 and	 a	 corpulent	 man	 entered	 the	 room.	 “You	 are	 getting	 out	 of	 control,
you	 bastard.	 Just	 because	 you	 are	 an	 inspector	 of	 the	 royal	 guards	 does	 not
mean	that	you	can	thrash	my	servants	around.	You’re	going	to	pay	a	price	for
it,”	the	man	screamed.
“Ah,	my	pleasure.	Vikrama	is	grateful	that	Your	Highness,	the	King	of	the
kitchen,	 has	 placed	 his	 holy	 feet	 in	 my	 lowly	 office.	 But	 why	 isn’t	 your
Highness	copulating	with	a	hussy	under	the	kitchen	stove?	Why	do	you	choose
to	be	here	at	this	hour	is	beyond	my	comprehension.”
“Vikrama,	you	son	of	a	drunken	monkey,	you	will	pay	for	this.	You	leave
my	servant	alone.	Else,	tomorrow	the	King	will	hear	about	it	and	you	will	be
breakfast	for	his	pet	tigers.”
“Take	your	boyfriend	and	have	a	nice	time.	Just	take	it	easy	while	you	are
at	it.	I	do	not	want	him	to	puncture	your	stinking	arse	and	wake	up	half	the	city
with	the	screaming.”	The	inspector	picked	me	up	like	a	rag	and	threw	me	at	the
fat	man.	I	fell	at	his	feet	and	tried	to	get	up.	The	inspector	and	the	fat	guy	stared
at	each	other.
Finally,	the	fat	man	turned	and	I	hurriedly	followed	him.	I	could	feel	the
inspector ’s	eyes	boring	holes	into	my	back.	He	will	get	me,	he’ll	surely	get	me
one	day.	 I	shuddered	at	the	thought	and	walked	 faster,	trying	to	catch	up	with
my	savior,	who	walked	surprisingly	fast	for	a	man	of	his	size.	He	did	not	speak
a	 single	 word	 until	 we	 entered	 a	 huge	 complex.	 “This	 is	 the	 central	 kitchen.
The	 entire	 army	 is	 fed	 from	 here.	 I	 am	 Suboga,	 the	 chief	 cook.	 I	 personally
supervise	 the	 food	 for	 the	 royal	 household.	 For	 the	 others,	 there	 are	 about
twenty	 supervisors	 and	 300	 cooks	 and	 helpers.	 Then	 there	 are	 the	 cleaning
staff,	servers	etc.	I	was	looking	for	someone	who	knows	about	fish	and	Arasu
suggested	I	take	you.	When	he	said	that	you	had	been	detained	by	that	rascal,	I
came	rushing	out.	But	do	not	think	I	am	your	friendly	uncle	and	will	be	always
there	 to	 save	 the	 black	 skin	 of	 your	 backside.	 I	 came	 to	 get	 you	 because	 six
people	on	the	ship	vouched	for	you.	You	can	join	Arasu’s	team.	I’ll	try	you	out
for	 a	 few	 weeks	 to	 see	 whether	 you	 are	 good	 enough	 for	 my	 kitchen.	 Your

sleeping	quarters	are	on	the	left.”
I	thanked	him,	relieved	to	have	escaped	alive	from	Vikrama.	“And	three
coppers	 a	 week	 will	 be	 your	 pay,”	 he	 shouted,	 walking	 towards	 the	 corridor
which	led	to	his	sleeping	room.	I	wanted	to	go	and	find	Arasu,	my	friend	from
the	ship,	and	thank	him.	But	it	was	late	and	I	thought	I’d	do	it	in	the	morning,	so
I	entered	the	room.	There	were	some	mattresses	spread	on	the	floor.	About	a
dozen	people	were	asleep	in	various	postures.	I	found	a	small	gap	and	crawled
in-between.	Tomorrow	I	would	start	work.	But	now	I	just	wanted	to	lie	down
and	sleep	for	a	hundred	years.

14	Betrayed
Ravana
One	by	one,	my	delegates	arrived.	The	mission	to	get	the	ships	had	been
successful.	 Maricha	 was	 also	 successful	 in	 getting	 the	 head	 of	 the	 school	 of
Mayans.	 He	 was	 said	 to	 possess	 one	 of	 the	 best	 engineering	 brains	 in	 the
country	 and	 had	 come	 with	 twenty	 of	 his	 best	 technicians.	 He	 was	 a	 widower
and	had	brought	his	daughter	along.	Did	I	want	this	unnecessary	distraction	in
my	almost	all-male	camp?	But	I	did	not	want	any	friction	at	this	stage.	She	was
said	to	be	a	bella
We	 had	 fixed	 the	 fifteenth	 of	 Chaitra	 as	 the	 day	 to	 start	 the	 expedition.
Jambumali	arranged	to	fill	the	lower	deck	with	provisions	to	last	a	few	days.
He	 led	 a	 number	 of	 sorties	 to	 a	 deserted	 beach	 south	 of	 Muzuris,	 where	 the
ships	 were	 anchored	 a	 few	 miles	 away.	 We	 carried	 supplies	 from	 nearby
villages	 and	 even	 the	 city	 market,	 in	 small	 quantities,	 in	 order	 to	 dispel	 any
suspicion	 and	 stored	 the	 supplies	 in	 a	 temporary	 camp	 in	 the	 woods	 near	 the
beach.	 From	 there,	 they	 were	 transported	 to	 the	 ships	 by	 night.	 The	 altered
chambers	 were	 filled	 with	 sacks	 of	 pepper	 and	 in	 them,	 weapons	 were
concealed.	About	300	men	were	hidden	in	a	secret	deck	in-between.	We	were
now	ready	to	go.
There	were	many	problems	and	initially	it	was	chaotic.	But	slowly	things
fell	into	place.	We	decided	to	leave	behind	in	the	forest,	a	few	hundred	soldiers
including	 my	mother,	aunt,	sister,	the	engineers	as	well	as	the	Mayan	and	his
daughter	and	proceed	to	Lanka.	Jambumali	was	also	left	behind	as	it	was	too
dangerous	 for	 him	 to	 go	 to	 the	 island.	 There	 might	 have	 been	 people	 who
would	have	recognized	the	former	governor	of	the	province.	There	was	even
the	chance	that	someone	might	recognize	any	of	us	three	brothers.	But	we	were
nobodies	in	Lanka	and	decided	to	take	the	chance.

As	 the	 fifteenth	 approached,	 the	 tension	 and	 excitement	 in	 the	 camp
became	 unbearable.	 All	 that	 was	 discussed	 was	 the	 forthcoming	 battle,	 war
strategy,	the	glories	of	Lanka,	the	beautiful	girls….	nobody	wanted	to	discuss
defeat	 and	 decimation.	 No	 one	 wanted	 to	 think	 about	 the	 eventuality	 of	 being
encountered	by	Varuna’s	 pirate	 fleet.	No	 one	dared	to	 mention	the	 possibility
of	 Bhadra,	 Kubera’s	 spy,	 pre-warning	 the	 merchant	 king	 and	 our	 being
ambushed.	We	pushed	such	thoughts	into	the	deepest	pits	of	our	minds.
Bhadra
A	 month	 had	 passed	 since	 I	 had	 become	 Kubera’s	 employee.	 There	 was
no	trace	of	our	ships.	The	monsoon	had	weakened	two	weeks	earlier	and	the
weather	became	balmier	by	the	day,	just	as	it	should	for	the	one	month	break
before	the	monsoon	retreated.	Every	Tuesday	I’d	go	to	the	market	to	buy	meat
and	vegetables	for	the	kitchen.	I	would	then	sneak	to	the	nearby	spice	market
which	overlooked	the	port,	to	look	out	for	the	ships	or	to	spot	a	familiar	face
in	the	crowd.
I	felt	uneasy	whenever	I	went	on	these	sorties.	It	was	as	if	someone	was
following	 me.	 It	 was	 a	 vague	 feeling	 but	 it	 persisted.	 I	 looked	 around,	 took
sharp,	 unexpected	 turns	 into	 narrow	 market	 alleys	 and	 ducked	 into	 small
eateries	 and	 emerged	 through	 the	 back	 doors	 of	 shops.	 But	 I	 could	 not	 find
anyone.	I	felt	naked.	I	was	afraid	of	my	own	shadow.	I	felt	morose	most	of	the
day	and	wanted	to	give	up	everything	and	go	back	to	some	unnamed	village	in
my	 native	 land.	 I	 would	 wake	 screaming	 in	 the	 night.	 I	 kept	 seeing	 the
splattered	 brains	 of	 my	 daughter,	 the	 spread,	 bleeding	 legs	 of	 my	 wife	 and
heaving	bare	buttocks	of	those	devils.	I	knew	I	had	to	stay	and	plot	my	revenge.
Vikrama	 sneered	 at	 me	 in	 my	 nightmares.	 He	 sat	 crosslegged	 and	 licked	 his
fingers,	 as	 if	 at	 a	 feast.	 He	 kept	 offering	 me	 some	 delicacy	 which	 invariably
turned	 out	 to	 be	 my	 daughter ’s	 splattered	 brain.	 At	 those	 moments,	 I	 forgot
about	 going	 back	 and	 the	 quiet	 life.	 All	 I	 wanted	 was	 to	 see	 the	 the	 Devas
ruined.	All	I	wanted	was	revenge.
Finally,	 I	 saw	 them	 one	 day,	 leading	 a	 few	 horses,	 laden	 with	 goods,
through	the	streets	of	the	spice	market.	They	had	spread	into	many	small	group
but	 I	 could	 easily	 distinguish	 Ravana.	 I	 was	 horrified.	 He	 did	 not	 have	 the
posture	of	a	merchant.	He	rode	like	a	king.	Alik	spicnd	which	king	would	be
found	 in	 a	 market	 place?	 Ravana,	 with	 his	 mannerisms,	 would	 give	 away	 the
whole	 plan.	 But	 I	 could	 have	 been	 wrong.	 Perhaps	 Ravana	 appeared	 to	 be	 a
prosperous	 merchant	 to	 others	 who	 were	 unaware	 of	 the	 invasion.	 The

soldiers,	disguised	as	servants,	were	also	a	big	give-away.	They	did	not	behave
like	servants	at	all.	They	did	not	chat	among	themselves.	They	did	not	linger	in
front	 of	 small	 shops	 selling	 sea	 shell	 necklaces	 and	 glass	 bangles	 or	 haggle
over	prices.	Instead,	they	walked	silently.	Their	cover	could	be	blown	any	time.
Then	I	noticed	the	two	ships	anchored	in	the	distance.	They	looked	so	puny	and
small.	I	had	to	get	near	my	king	and	warn	him.	But	what	if	he	did	not	trust	me?
“So,	 this	 is	 what	 you	 came	 for,	 eh?”	 I	 was	 startled	 to	 hear	 Vikrama’s
voice.	 He	 was	 standing	 behind	 me	 and	 chewing	 a	 blade	 of	 grass,	 perfectly
disguised	as	a	petty	merchant	who	merged	with	the	surroundings.	In	one	hand
he	held	a	small	brown	bag	like	those	used	by	petty	merchants	and	the	other	was
behind	his	back.	I	was	sure	he	had	a	dagger	in	that	hand.	Before	he	could	do
anything,	I	stepped	on	his	toes	and	gave	him	a	hard	push.	He	staggered	and	fell
flat	 on	 his	 back.	 He	 was	 quick	 to	 scramble	 up	 but	 I	 had	 taken	 off	 by	 then.	 I
could	see	the	dagger	blade	glistening	in	the	sun.	The	crowd	screamed.	I	weaved
in	 and	 out	 of	 the	 crowd	 as	 fast	 as	 I	 could	 move,	 overturning	 carts	 of	 fruits,
stepping	 over	 vermillion	 mounds,	 getting	 screamed	 at,	 abused,	 clawed	 and
even	hit,	by	the	hawkers	and	sales	boys.	Ravana	turned	towards	me.	Confusion
clouded	 his	 face.	 Then,	 as	 he	 recognized	 me,	 I	 saw	 pure	 hatred	 cross	 his
handsome	 face.	 I	 saw	 men	 moving	 and	 circling	 us	 from	 all	 directions.
Disguised	guards	were	closing	in	on	us.	Vikrama	was	thorough	and	he	had	us
like	a	lemon	in	his	hand.	And	he	was	squeezing	us	hard.
“Get	away!”	I	screamed	at	the	top	of	my	voice.	I	saw	the	glitter	of	a	sword
in	Ravana’s	hand.	And	then	I	saw	hundreds	of	swords	drawn	up	in	the	crowd.
Dust	swirled	in	different	corners	of	the	market	as	Ravana’s	men	struggled	to
escape.	I	reached	the	King’s	horse	and	cried,	“Take	me,	my	Lord,	take	me	with
you.”
Vikrama	 was	 very	 near.	 At	 any	 moment	 I	 would	 be	 killed	 or	 taken
prisoner.
Ravana	roared,	“You	traitor,	son	of	a	scoundrel!	Go	rot	in	hell!”	The	kick
I	received	on	the	bridge	of	my	nose	did	not	hurt	half	as	much	as	those	words.	I
nearly	fell	on	Vikrama,	but	he	dodged	me	adroitly	and	went	for	Ravana.	He	got
hold	of	the	horse’s	rein	and	tried	to	stab	the	king.	Another	powerful	kick	from
Ravana	left	Vikrama	sprawled	on	the	floor.	I	saw	with	relief	that	Ravana’s	men
had	succeeded	in	breaking	the	ranks	of	the	guards.	The	king	was	hacking	and
thrusting	his	way	out	of	the	crowd	and	shouting	commands	for	a	retreat.	Soon
he	 rode	 out	 of	 the	 market	 at	 full	 gallop	 with	 his	 followers	 behind,	 some	 on
horses	and	others	running	to	catch	up.	This	small	group	left	the	market	with	a

few	 guards	 half-heartedly	 following	 them.	 The	 blood	 from	 my	 broken	 nose
had	formed	a	pool.	I	tried	to	stand	up	but	got	a	sharp	kick	on	my	face.	Vikrama
was	red	with	anger.	He	kicked	me	hard,	again	and	again.	I	wanted	to	get	up	and
flee	but	Vikrama’s	kicks	landed	like	rain.	I	had	almost	lost	consciousness	when
someone	 half-lifted,	 half-dragged	 me	 towards	 the	 palace.	 I	 was	 bleeding	 all
over	by	the	time	I	reached	the	small	cell	of	Vikrama’s	office.	There	he	started
his	act	all	over	again.	I	wished	I	had	died	before	I	had	got	to	his	jail.
Ravana
Ruined.	Ruined,	because	of	a	bastard.	Months	of	planning,	struggling	for
arms	 and	 supplies,	 training	 and	 living	 under	 the	 sun	 and	 rain.	 Everything
ruined	because	our	good-for-nothing	guards	could	not	get	their	hands	on	that
short,	stout	farmer.	I	could	grind	him	with	my	bare	hands.	But	I	knew	this	kind
of	 anger	 and	 frustration	 wourusour	 ld	 only	 make	 our	 lives	 more	 miserable.
Prahastha	 was	 asleep	 under	 a	 tree	 and	 Sumali	 and	 Rudraka	 were	 discussing
something	 after	 drawing	 maps	 in	 the	 sand.	 Kumbha	 and	 Vibhishana	 had
vanished	into	the	woods.	The	war	was	lost	even	before	a	single	encounter	with
the	 enemy.	 I	 wanted	 to	 take	 Lanka	 head	 on	 and	 go	 down	 in	 a	 trail	 of	 glory.	 I
wanted	to	lead	my	soldiers	to	Kubera’s	palace	and	die	valiantly.	But	Prahastha
thought	 it	 was	 suicidal.	 A	 more	 efficient	 way	 to	 die,	 he	 thought,	 would	 be	 to
jump	 off	 the	 cliff	 on	 which	 we	 were	 now	 perched.	 That	 way	 we	 would	 not
bring	misery	to	the	civilians.	So	we	were	stuck	in	this	hellhole.	We	were	on	top
of	the	Subela	hills,	overlooking	the	sea	on	one	side	and	Kubera’s	palace	on	the
other.	In	the	valley	between,	Kubera’s	army	waited	for	us.	We	were	besieged.
They	 could	 come	 up	 and	 finished	 us	 off	 at	 any	 time.	 They	 were	 certain	 we
would	 starve	 to	 death.	 The	 Subela	 Hills	 were	 bare	 and	 the	 woods	 had	 little
game.	It	would	not	support	300	people	for	long.	We	saw	our	ship,	modified	by
the	Mayans,	the	ship	to	glory	and	the	rebirth	of	the	Asura	kingdom,	sunk	like	a
leaf	boat	by	Kubera’s	navy.	All	our	spare	weapons	found	a	good	storage	place
at	the	bottom	of	200	feet	of	water.
Only	 Maricha	 took	 things	 lightly.	 The	 old	 man	 was	 always	 cheerful.	 He
devised	games	to	amuse	the	soldiers	and	told	them	stories	of	olden	times,	when
things	 were	 not	 modern	 and	 complicated,	 when	 thoughts	 were	 pure	 and	 men
had	the	time	to	enjoy	life	and	the	world	was	a	better	place	to	live	in.	Huddled
around	a	fire,	we	imagined	ourselves	living	in	those	unhurried	times	when	our
forefathers	 lived	 and	 breathed	 fresh	 air.	 He	 always	 ended	 his	 tales	 lamenting
how	 things	 now	 were	 when	 young	 men	 no	 longer	 respected	 elders,	 people

cheated	 and	 lied	 all	 the	 time	 and	 hurried	 through	 life.	 But	 he	 maintained	 that
things	would	be	better	in	the	future.	Maricha,	you’re	such	an	optimistic	human
being,	such	a	wonderful	man.	What	would	we	have	done	without	you?
The	retreating	monsoon	started.	We	were	soaked,	sick	and	frustrated	to	be
alive.	 Half	 the	 soldiers	 were	 down	 with	 fever	 and	 we	 were	 starving.	 I	 waited
under	the	dark	sky,	with	monsoon	clouds	swirling	above	me.	Claps	of	thunder
resounded.	I	had	fought	with	Prahastha	again	and	again	about	staying	here	and
dying	 like	 flies.	 He	 was	 adamant	 that	 we	 remain	 where	 we	 were.	 We’d	 walk
into	Kubera’s	trap	if	we	moved.	I	could	sense	revolt	within	the	ranks	and	see
that	 their	 confidence	 in	 me	 had	 ebbed	 considerably.	 There	 were	 no	 cries	 of,
“Long	 live	 the	 King!”	 whenever	 I	 moved	 about.	 Fewer	 men	 attended	 the
morning	parade	and	drill.	I	had	the	nagging	doubt	that	Prahastha	was	counting
on	a	rebellion	in	the	ranks	to	take	over	as	leader.	I	spoke	about	it	with	Kumbha.
He	thought	it	was	my	imagination	but	promised	to	keep	an	eye	on	Prahastha.	I
waited	for	deliverance	and	hoped	for	a	lot	to	happen.	That	Varuna	would	attack
the	 island	 and	 offer	 us	 a	 respectable	 path	 for	 retreat.	 I	 hoped	 the	 sea	 would
swallow	the	island.	I	hoped	Kubera	would	be	killed	in	a	palace	coup	and	then	I,
his	half	brother,	would	be	invited	to	rule	the	island.	I	knew	none	of	these	things
would	 ever	 happen.	 What	 was	 sure	 was	 the	 vultures	 circling	 high	 in	 the	 sky,
waiting	for	us	to	fall	and	die	one	by	one.
Then	one	day,	unexpectedly,	my	wishes	came	true.

15	Poisonous	brews
Bhadra
I	was	surprised	that	I	was	still	alive.	They	had	plucked	the	nails	from	all
my	 fingers	 and	toes.	They	 scalded	me,	poked	me	with	spiked	rods,	sprinkled
pepper	powder	on	my	flayed	skin,	hung	me	upside	down	and	lashed	me.	I	lost
count	of	what	was	done	to	me.	My	wounds	became	infected	and	flies	circled	to
settle	on	them.	I	retched	and	curled	up	naked	on	the	mud	floor.	Fleas	and	ants
came	out	of	mother	earth	to	eat	me	arusou	done	tolive.	Vikrama	came	once	in
a	while	and	poked	me	with	his	sword	tip,	sometimes	thrusting	it	a	bit	too	deep,
all	 the	 while	 taunting	 me.	 Then	 he	 laughed	 his	 devilish	 laugh.	 I	 lay	 without	 a
thought.	I	became	numb.	It	might	have	been	two	weeks	or	two	years.	I	did	not
know	and	I	did	not	care.	I	just	wanted	to	die.
Then	 one	 day,	 suddenly,	 I	 decided	 to	 live.	 Vikrama	 had	 either	 grown
bored	 with	 me	 or	 was	 too	 busy.	 I	 didn’t	 see	 him	 too	 often.	 The	 guards	 felt
sorry	 for	 me	 and	 brought	 a	 doctor	 to	 my	 cell.	 He	 inflicted	 even	 more	 pain
while	examining	my	wounds.	But	after	a	while	my	wounds	healed	and	my	body
got	stronger.	A	guard	named	Suka,	became	rather	close	to	me.	During	his	work
shift,	which	was	usually	midnight,	he	talked	about	his	village	on	the	southern
coast	of	the	island,	his	wife	and	six	young	children,	waiting	for	him	to	come
back,	 and	 the	 debts	 he	 had	 pay.	 I	 listened	 because	 I	 wanted	 to	 escape.	 I	 heard
him	patiently	because	I	wanted	him	to	trust	me.	I	feigned	attention	as	I	was	sure
that	I	would	murder	him	one	day.	He	nursed	me,	soothed	my	bruised	soul,	and
entertained	 me	 with	 his	 stories.	 I	 was	 afraid	 that	 I	 would	 start	 loving	 him,	 so
one	night,	when	he	was	talking	to	me,	I	feigned	weakness	and	leaned	on	him.
He	carried	me	and	put	me	down	on	the	torn	mattress	that	was	my	bed.	From	the
corner	 of	 my	 eye,	 I	 saw	 the	 prison	 door	 was	 ajar.	 This	 was	 the	 chance	 I	 had
been	waiting	for.	I	strangled	him.	I	still	remember	his	face	when	he	understood

that	I	was	killing	him.	His	face,	with	its	trust	in	humanity	draining	away	as	fast
as	his	life	ebbed,	will	remain	etched	in	my	mind.
I	 placed	 him	 on	 the	 mattress	 and	 said	 a	 silent	 prayer	 for	 his	 soul.	 For	 a
moment,	 the	 thought	 of	 his	 faceless	 and	 tired	 wife	 with	 her	 six	 children,
waiting	in	a	far-away	southern	village	for	this	man,	flashed	through	my	mind.
It	 lingered	 for	 a	 second	 or	 two	 but	 then	 I	 remembered	 that	 there	 were	 other
guards	 outside.	 It	 was	 not	 safe	 to	 linger,	 I	 had	 to	 get	 out.	 I	 peered	 out.	 It	 was
past	midnight,	to	judge	by	the	absence	of	sounds	from	the	street	beyond.	One
guard	 dozed	 near	 the	 door,	 two	 others	 chatted	 by	 the	 wall	 lamp	 which	 cast	 a
ghostly	 light	 on	 their	 faces.	 The	 lamp	 flickered	 in	 the	 breeze	 and	 made	 the
shadows	jump	in	a	macabre	dance.	I	froze	near	the	door	and	thanked	my	stars
that	they	had	detained	me	in	the	temporary	prison	attached	to	the	guard	house
and	 not	 in	 the	 notorious	 town	 prison	 with	 its	 high	 walls	 and	 the	 moat	 with
marsh	crocodiles.	It	would	have	been	quite	a	task	for	Vikrama	to	walk	every
day	 to	 the	 town	 prison	 to	 torture	 me.	 Here	 in	 his	 office,	 he	 could	 torture	 me
whenever	 he	 wanted	 to.	 There	 were	 two	 other	 cells.	 I	 prayed	 they	 would	 be
either	 empty	 or	 the	 prisoners	 fast	 asleep.	 The	 sleeping	 guard	 stirred,
murmured	something	and	went	back	to	sleep.	I	crept	on	all	fours	towards	him.	I
wanted	 his	 sword	 which	 hung	 behind	 his	 stone	 desk.	 The	 wall	 lamp	 went	 out
and	 I	 heard	 the	 guards	 near	 the	 door	 swear.	 The	 sleeping	 guard	 awoke	 and
looked	for	his	sword.	I	quickly	grabbed	it	from	the	hinge	and	unsheathed	it.	I
tried	 to	 squeeze	 through	 the	 narrow	 gap	 between	 the	 table	 and	 the	 wall	 but
collided	with	a	guard.
“Take	 care,	 you	 fool!”	 he	 said.	 Then	 I	 saw	 him	 freeze	 and	 heard	 the
scrape	of	his	sword	being	unsheathed.	I	was	sure	he	would	not	use	it	but	I	did
not	wait.	I	plunged	my	sword	into	what	I	thought	was	his	throat	and	felt	warm
blood	splash	on	my	face.	I	pushed	his	weakening	body	down	and	ran	towards
the	grey	rectangle	of	light	filtering	in	from	the	street.	I	could	hear	the	guards
stumbling	over	each	other.	Any	moment	they	would	ring	the	huge	bell	and	the
city	 would	 become	 one	 huge	 beast	 hunting	 me	 down.	 Mounted	 patrol-men
would	assemble	at	the	guard	house	and	Vikrama	would	arrive.	I	looked	to	left
and	right,	deciding	which	way	to	run.	The	sharp	pealing	of	the	bell	ended	my
indecision	and	I	ran	left,	towards	the	palace.
I	 ran	 like	 a	 mad	 dog.	 It	 took	 me	 a	 few	 minutes	 to	 realize	 that	 I	 was
running	 through	 the	 royal	 highway.	 Iyalght	 could	 come	 face	 to	 face	 with	 the
mounted	 guards	 at	 any	 time	 and	 I	 could	 hear	 the	 sound	 of	 hoofs.	 Abruptly	 I
turned	right	and	entered	an	alley.	It	was	dark	and	the	street	lamps	had	gone	out.

A	rectangular	window	of	light	made	patterns	on	the	farthest	corner	of	the	alley.
As	I	walked	towards	it	I	could	hear	conversation.	A	woman	was	arguing	with	a
man	who	was	obviously	drunk.	I	was	nervous	and	needed	a	place	to	hide.	The
door	suddenly	banged	open	and	I	quickly	stepped	back	into	the	dark	shadows.
A	bulky	man	in	his	undergarments	was	pushed	out.	He	stumbled	a	few	paces,
hit	 a	 lamp	 post	 and	 fell	 face	 down	 into	 a	 gutter.	 A	 stream	 of	 abuse	 followed
him.	The	man	did	not	stir	at	all.	This	was	surely	not	his	home.	No	decent	lady
would	swear	like	that.	It	could	have	been	one	of	those	dance	houses	or	a	house
of	pleasure.	Before	she	could	slam	the	door	I	stepped	out	of	the	darkness	and
put	my	foot	in	the	door.
She	 was	 shocked	 for	 a	 second.	 I	 noticed	 that	 she	 was	 about	 eighteen	 or
twenty,	 with	 hazel	 brown	 eyes	 and	 straight	 jet	 black	 hair.	 She	 was	 fair	 like	 a
Deva	woman	or	a	cross	breed.	She	had	on	a	silk	blouse	that	barely	covered	her
breasts	and	a	silk	dhothi	tucked	inches	below	her	naval.	 A	diamond	on	a	thin
gold	 chain	 lay	 wedged	 in	 her	 cleavage.	 I	 entered	 the	 house	 before	 she	 could
scream	and	closed	the	door	firmly	with	my	left	hand	while	pointing	my	sword
at	 her	 throat.	 I	 knew	 there	 would	 be	 guards	 in	 the	 house.	 Such	 places	 needed
them	and	they	were	more	brutal	than	the	palace	guards.
“Take	 me	 to	 your	 room,”	 I	 said,	 aware	 that	 my	 manhood	 had	 started
rising	on	seeing	her	sensual	body.	A	smile	played	on	her	lips.	She	looked	at	my
face.	I	felt	inadequate	and	ugly.	She	settled	her	eyes	on	my	crotch.	Restrained
and	long-forgotten	emotions	tried	to	break	through	the	shackles.	She	burst	out
laughing	and	I	felt	like	throwing	the	sword	away	and	covering	my	shame	with
both	hands.
A	loud	knock	on	the	door	broke	the	spell	and	I	grabbed	the	knot	of	her
dhothi	 and	 pulled	 her	 towards	 me.	 I	 whispered	 death	 into	 her	 ears	 and	 she
understood.	 Her	 breasts	 brushed	 against	 my	 bare	 skin.	 She	 pushed	 me	 away
firmly	 yet	 gently	 and	 said	 that	 she	 would	 take	 care	 of	 things.	 Freeing	 her,	 I
moved	behind	the	thick	curtains	while	she	opened	the	door.	There	were	guards
outside.	I	heard	them	but	could	not	make	out	what	was	said.	I	was	sure	she	had
betrayed	 me	and	at	 any	moment	the	guards	would	enter	 and	drag	me	back	 to
prison.	I	waited	for	the	first	guard	to	enter	and	felt	the	sharp	edge	of	my	sword.
I	decided	not	to	go	down	without	a	fight.	I	would	not	be	gifted	back	to	Vikrama.
But	with	astonishment	and	relief,	I	heard	the	steps	moving	away.	She	came	in
and	closed	the	door.
“Come	 out,	 you	 coward”	 she	 taunted	 and	 then	 burst	 out	 laughing.	 I	 felt
like	grabbing	her	and	kissing	her	mouth.	I	felt	like	plunging	my	sword	between

her	breasts	and	puncturing	her	heart.	I	felt	so	many	things	as	I	stood	there	with
my	sword	hanging	limply	in	my	right	hand,	my	left	hand	twisting	the	drapes	of
the	 curtains	 and	 my	 legs	 shivering	 and	 unsteady.	 “Follow	 me,”	 she	 said	 and
walked	 confidently	 towards	 a	 flight	 of	 wooden	 stairs.	 I	 followed	 her	 like	 an
obedient	dog.
I	awoke	in	the	morning	to	see	her	sitting	in	a	chair	near	my	bed.	I	tried	to
reach	for	the	sword	but	it	wasn’t	in	its	place.	She	smiled	and	said	that	she	had	it
in	safe	custody.	She	was	wearing	a	pale	blue	blouse	and	a	white	cotton	dhothi,
which	made	her	look	even	more	beautiful.	The	diamond	was	missing;	she	had
taken	bath	and	applied	a	small	sandal	paste	bindi	to	her	forehead.	I	remembered
that	last	night	she	had	led	me	to	this	room	and	closed	the	door	from	outside.	I
had	slept	with	frustrated	imagesstr>	of	having	sex	with	her	and	not	rising	to	her
expectations,	of	Vikrama	cutting	my	balls	off	and	offering	them	to	this	woman.	I
was	not	sure	whether	I	was	a	prisoner	or	a	refugee.
“So,	let	me	hear	your	story.”	Her	lovely	mouth	was	inviting	enough	for
me	 to	 narrate	 my	 life	 story.	 I	 told	 her	 about	 my	 childhood,	 of	 the	 games	 I
played,	 about	 the	 fast	 currents	 of	 the	 Poorna,	 of	 the	 huge	 rosewood	 trees	 I
climbed	to	get	honey.	I	told	her	my	story	over	breakfast,	over	fruits	and	nuts
we	 had	 together,	 over	 lunch,	 while	 walking	 in	 the	 small	 garden	 in	 her
backyard,	before	we	made	love,	when	we	made	love,	and	after	we	made	love.	I
took	more	than	a	week	to	narrate	my	story.	As	I	spoke,	my	childhood	became
picture	 perfect,	 my	 village	 became	 heaven,	 the	 Devas	 who	 had	 attacked	 it
became	the	worst	kind	of	devils.	My	adventures	became	bolder,	my	role	with
Mahabali’s	army	important,	my	position	with	Ravana	high,	my	culinary	skills
perfect.	 And	 my	 torment	 under	 Vikrama	 unbearable.	 I	 exaggerated	 and	 she
realized	 I	 was	 exaggerating,	 adding	 frills	 to	 the	 humble	 life	 of	 a	 common
farmer.	I	knew	she	understood	and	somehow	it	did	not	matter.
She	was	a	dance	girl.	She	did	not	know	her	name.	People	called	her	Mala
and	she	called	herself	the	same.	She	sold	her	body	and	earned	a	good	living.
But	it	took	a	long	time	and	practice	for	her	to	establish	her	reputation.	She	had
no	 remorse	 and	 said	 this	 unabashedly,	 as	 someone	 who	 says	 she	 is	 a	 good
dancer	 or	 a	 doctor	 or	 an	 actor.	 Her	 clients	 were	 rich	 merchants	 and	 high
officials	and	she	lived	alone	with	no	guards	or	a	protecting	madam.	She	told
me	 that	 Vikrama	 was	 a	 regular	 and	 that	 he	 was	 lousy	 in	 bed.	 Somehow	 this
gave	me	a	perverse	satisfaction.	I	fell	in	love	with	her.	She	served	her	clients
and	 I	 waited	 in	 my	 upper	 chamber	 for	 her	 to	 come	 to	 me.	 I	 was	 jealous	 at
times,	 but	 thankful	 also	 to	 get	 her	 back.	 Slowly,	 I	 told	 her	 about	 my	 life’s

mission.	She	was	disinterested	at	first,	but	after	two	weeks	of	my	conversation,
she	 started	 taking	 some	 interest.	 Then	 she	 caught	 my	 enthusiasm	 and	 I	 taught
her	hatred.	She	gave	me	love	and	I	gave	her	hatred	instead.	I	wanted	her	to	be
on	my	side.	I	plotted	with	her.	I	corrupted	her	by	giving	her	my	love	which	was
nothing	but	pure	hatred	towards	anyone	not	like	me.
One	evening,	she	came	to	my	room	and	said	that	Vikrama	was	her	client
for	the	night.	I	burnt	with	jealousy	but	it	was	time	for	us	to	put	our	plan	into
action.	 I	 hid	 behind	 the	 thick	 curtains	 and	 waited	 with	 trepidation.	 I	 saw
Vikrama	enter	the	room.	Mala	stood	up	and	walked	towards	him	and	planted	a
kiss	on	his	lips.	I	burned	hidden	behind	the	curtains.	He	walked	to	the	tall	bed
and	 removed	his	gold	brocade	footwear	and	tucked	his	feet	up.	Mala	stood	a
few	 feet	 away	 and	 removed	 her	 blouse.	 She	 fell	 on	 Vikrama	 and	 with	 her
breasts	rubbing	his	bare	chest,	tied	both	his	hands	to	the	bed	pole	with	a	shawl.
Then	she	removed	his	dress	and	hers	too.	She	stood	there	naked,	elegant	and
beautiful.	 Vikrama	 was	 lying	 prone,	 his	 tough	 muscled	 pale	 body	 twisting	 in
anticipation.	She	took	off	her	dhothi	and	tied	his	legs	too.
I	walked	out	slowly	to	Vikrama.	Mala	withdrew	and	picked	up	her	clothes
and	started	putting	them	on.	Then	she	left	the	room	in	a	hurry.	“What	the	hell.	.
.”	 Vikrama’s	 face	 flushed	 with	 anger	 and	 then	 it	 dawned	 on	 him.	 I	 was	 death
coming.	He	froze.	I	put	on	my	best	smile	and	walked	deliberately	towards	him,
measuring	 each	 step.	 He	 struggled	 to	 get	 up	 but	 Mala	 had	 tied	 him	 nice	 and
tight.	 I	 pulled	 out	 his	 nails	 one	 by	 one.	 With	 the	 clinical	 precision	 of	 a	 good
butcher,	 I	 deposited	 then	 in	 a	 plate	 after	 emptying	 the	 mangoes	 it	 contained,
onto	the	floor.	He	screamed	and	screamed.	I	told	him	he	didn’t	have	to	worry,
he	would	not	die	for	another	four	or	five	hours	and	I	would	continue	to	work
on	him	till	then,	or	even	after	he	died.	I	broke	his	bones,	emasculated	him	and
then	 I	 took	 pepper	 powder	 and	 spreaddere	 for	 an	 it	 over	 his	 wounds.	 He
screamed	 and	 screamed	 but	 he	 did	 not	 die.	 Finally,	 about	 two	 hours	 before
daybreak,	he	died.
I	was	not	happy	or	satisfied,	it	was	not	enough,	but	I	had	learnt	the	hard
way	 that	 life	 does	 not	 satisfy	 you	 completely.	 So	 I	 stopped	 and	 picked	 up
Vikrama.	 I	 dropped	 all	 the	 pieces	 into	 a	 sack	 and	 called	 out	 for	 Mala.	 She
entered	the	room,	saw	the	mess	and	vomited	on	the	sack.	‘Serves	him	right,’	I
thought.	‘Carry	the	vomit	of	a	whore	on	your	head	to	your	grave,	you	devil.’	It
took	half	an	hour	to	console	her,	but	I	think	she	was	happy	to	see	me	glow	with
happiness.
We	 carried	 the	 sack	 to	 the	 back	 garden	 and	 burnt	 it	 with	 sugar,	 which

would	not	leave	any	trace	of	the	body.	We	hoped	no	one	would	notice	the	acrid
smell	 of	 flesh	 burning.	 I	 went	 out	 and	 killed	 two	 stray	 dogs	 and	 put	 them	 in
along	 with	 the	 burning	 corpse.	 That	 would	 put	 off	 any	 nosy	 neighbour.	 Thus
ended	Vikrama,	chief	of	the	palace	guards.
I	had	managed	to	take	the	keys	from	his	pocket	and	I	wanted	to	get	into
the	fort.	I	had	to	do	it	before	the	chief	was	missed.	As	I	walked	towards	the	fort.
I	 could	 see	 the	 lit	 palace	 in	 the	 distance.	 I	 was	 still	 a	 wanted	 man	 and	 it	 was
dangerous	 to	 move	 about,	 but	 I	 did	 not	 have	 a	 choice.	 There	 was	 a	 separate
entrance	to	the	fort	for	security	officers	and	I	decided	to	use	it.	I	was	dressed	in
Vikrama’s	clothes,	which	were	a	bit	too	big	for	me.	I	tried	to	walk	like	a	man
used	to	authority	but	was	not	sure	if	I	could	fool	the	guards.	I	was	too	tame	for
a	 guard.	 As	 I	 neared	 the	 palace	 I	 saw	 two	 guards	 stationed	 near	 the	 security
entrance	 but	 I	 walked	 past	 them	 with	 an	 air	 of	 authority	 and	 they	 snapped	 to
attention.	They	were	looking	at	the	distant	horizon,	where	the	sky	was	turning
orange.	I	could	hear	my	heart	pounding	and	was	afraid	the	guards	would	hear
it	 and	 look	 at	 my	 face.	 My	 hands	 trembled	 as	 I	 turned	 the	 key.	 Nothing
happened.	Beads	of	sweat	fell	from	my	brows.	Dawn	was	painting	the	eastern
skies	pale.
“Let	me,	Sir.”	The	taller	of	the	guards	took	the	keys	from	my	hands,	put
the	 right	 one	 in	 and	 turned.	 With	 a	 clank,	 the	 door	 opened	 and	 I	 stepped	 in,
thanked	the	guard	and	quickly	closed	the	door	behind	me.	I	checked	the	small
mud	vessel	I	carried	with	me.	It	had	taken	me	more	than	ten	days	to	prepare	the
thing.	 I	 removed	 the	 chief’s	 uniform,	 made	 a	 bundle	 and	 shoved	 it	 under	 a
bush.	Then,	dressed	in	my	own	clothes,	I	walked	into	the	royal	kitchen,	where	I
had	 worked	 earlier.	 About	 twenty	 cooks	 were	 busy	 preparing	 food	 for	 the
army.	 I	 hoped	 they	 had	 not	 heard	 about	 my	 arrest	 and	 detention.	 Perhaps
Suboga	might	have	known,	as	Vikrama	would	have	not	let	go	an	opportunity	to
get	even	with	the	fat	cook.	But	the	chef’s	ego	would	have	prevented	him	from
telling	his	subordinates.
“Hey	Bhadra,	where	were	you?	Suboga	said	you	had	gone	to	your	native
village	on	the	mainland.	You’ve	just	returned?”	Kriman,	a	loud-mouthed	fish
cutter,	shouted	from	the	other	end	of	the	kitchen.	All	heads	turned	towards	me
and	many	smiled.	I	could	not	see	my	friend	who	had	got	me	the	job	here.
“If	 you	 are	 looking	 for	 Arasu,	 he	 was	 sacked.	 I	 think	 some	 captain
complained	 about	 his	 cooking	 and	 he	 was	 sent	 back	 to	 the	 mainland.	 These
beggars	in	the	army	think	they	are	Gods.”	I	felt	a	knot	in	my	stomach.	So	Arasu
got	the	boot	for	helping	me.	The	bastards!	I	could	not	blame	Suboga.	It	was	his

head	he	had	to	take	care	of	first.	“You	have	to	first	go	and	meet	Suboga	or	he
will	 get	 angry”	 old	 Mupra	 said	 “Is	 that	 his	 instruction?”	 I	 asked	 knowing	 all
too	well	that	Suboga	didn’t	think	I’d	be	back	at	all.
“No.	.	.”
“Then	 I	 will	 join	 you	 now	 and	 see	 him	 later,	 after	 we	 have	 served
breakfast.”
I	 enter="-	 size=ed	 the	 vegetable	 chopping	 section	 and	 started	 working.
After	I	had	moved	close	to	the	stove	to	pass	on	the	chopped	vegetables	for	the
third	time,	I	took	out	the	mud	pot	and	emptied	the	contents	into	the	boiling	rice.
The	soldiers	prefer	different	curries,	but	everyone	ate	rice.	I	was	counting	on
that.	 I	 waited	 with	 bated	 breath.	 Bullock	 cart	 after	 bullock	 carts	 arrived	 and
carried	baskets	full	of	rice	and	different	curries	to	the	various	sections	of	the
army.	Boats	would	carry	them	to	the	ships	moored	at	sea,	if	they	were	stationed
near	 the	 capital.	 A	 number	 of	 things	 could	 go	 wrong.	 A	 small	 bit	 could	 spill
onto	 the	 ground,	 a	 crow	 could	 eat	 it	 and	 fall	 dead,	 and	 my	 secret	 would	 be
blown.	Or,	a	few	soldiers	could	die	or	fall	sick	and	the	army	would	stop	eating
the	food	and	start	an	enquiry.	I	would	be	caught.	I	prayed	and	fretted	at	the	same
time.	Yet	I	smiled	as	I	continued	to	work	inside	the	steaming	kitchen.

After	 an	 hour,	 I	 heard	 a	 commotion	 outside.	 They	 were	 bringing	 in
soldiers	 upon	 soldiers,	 men	 retching,	 and	 men	 in	 the	 pangs	 of	 death,	 men
twitching	 in	 agony.	 Bullock	 carts	 and	 horse-drawn	 carts	 were	 bringing	 men
from	 all	 corners	 of	 the	 city	 and	 dumping	 them	 in	 the	 palace	 grounds	 for	 the
palace	 doctors	 to	 examine.	 I	 ran	 out.	 Nobody	 noticed.	 I	 wanted	 to	 reach	 my
master.	I	wanted	my	King,	Ravana,	to	come	and	take	over	the	city.	I	ran	amidst
falling	soldiers	vomiting,	with	their	heads	buried	in	drains,	men	grabbing	their
stomach,	twisting	in	their	death	pangs.	I	grabbed	the	reigns	of	a	horse	from	a
soldier	who	was	clinging	with	one	hand	to	the	horse	and	vomiting	on	the	other

side.	 I	 kicked	 him,	 mounted	 the	 horse,	 and	 galloped	 towards	 the	 Subela	 hills.
Ordinary	 citizens	 started	 to	 assemble	 on	 the	 streets,	 peering	 at	 the	 dying
soldiers.	A	country	was	being	released	from	the	tyranny	of	a	merchant	king.
I	galloped	through	the	pouring	crowds,	running	to	watch	their	tormentors
dying.	As	I	climbed	the	Subela	hills,	I	remembered	to	tear	off	a	portion	of	my
white	 mundu	 and	 tie	 it	 to	 a	 staff.	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to	 die	 in	 friendly	 fire.	 As	 I
neared	the	camp,	I	could	see	archers	forming	a	circle	around	their	king.	They
were	 ready	 to	 shoot	 and	 a	 slight	 movement	 of	 the	 kings’	 brow	 would	 have
ensured	that	I	ended	up	looking	like	a	porcupine.	I	slowed	down	and	waved	my
white	 flag.	 Tears	 welled	 in	 my	 eyes.	 My	 words	 seemed	 stuck	 in	 my	 throat,
“Your	Highness,	the	city	is	yours.	I	have	finished	Kubera’s	army.	.	.”
“Arrest	 him.”	 His	 voice	 shattered	 my	 heart.	 Images	 of	 my	 nails	 being
pulled	out,	filled	my	mind.	My	body	ached	in	all	the	places	where	Vikrama	had
performed	his	art.	I	fell	on	my	knees	and	howled	like	a	wounded	wolf.	Soldiers
from	 the	 side	 I	 had	 always	 believed	 to	 be	 my	 own,	 surrounded	 me,	 ready	 to
kill.
“Ravana,	 just	 hear	 him	 out.”	 I	 could	 see	 the	 old,	 aristocratic	 figure	 of
Prahastha	walking	towards	us.	Maricha	also	came,	pushing	the	soldiers	back,
and	lifted	me	up.	He	hugged	me	and	patted	my	back.	I	sobbed	like	a	little	baby
and	I	could	feel	Maricha’s	tears	wetting	the	bare	skin	on	my	back.

16	The	pirate’s	seige
Ravana
I	took	some	time	to	realize	that	Bhadra	was	not	a	traitor	but	a	friend.	He
was	 the	 saviour	 I	 had	 been	 waiting	 for.	 With	 renewed	 vigour,	 we	 clambered
down	the	hills	and	marched	with	as	much	dignity	an	army	of	starving	troops
could	muster.	As	we	entered	the	Royal	Street,	we	could	see	thousands	of	people
standing	 on	 either	 side,	 cheering	 us.	 I	 was	 elated.	 This	 was	 the	 moment	 of
triumph	 I	 had	 anticipated.	 Unknown	 amounts	 of	 wealth	 awaited	 me.	 I	 could
build	an	army	with	the	great	resources	this	kingdom	poss="-	sn	amoessed	and
then	 take	 over	 the	 entire	 sub-continent.	 Moreover,	 I	 could	 throw	 my	 halfbrother	onto	the	streets,	which	he	deserved,	and	with	a	flick	my	hands,	throw
him	a	few	gold	coins.	I	could	look	at	my	father ’s	face	and	jeer.	I	could	do	so
many	things.	I	was	the	King	and	the	Emperor.	Ravana,	the	Emperor	of	Lanka,
sounded	 good.	 Ravana,	 the	 Emperor	 of	 India,	 sounded	 even	 better.	 Was	 I
getting	too	ambitious?	No,	no,	I	was	always	self-confident.
Cheers	 erupted	 from	 all	 sides	 and	 I	 raised	 my	 sword.	 The	 crowd	 went
mad.	There	were	cries	of	ecstasy.	People	danced	on	the	roads.	Drums	beat	with
full	 vigour	 and	 pipes	 and	 horns	 blasted	 the	 sky.	 I	 was	 in	 dreamland.	 Then,
suddenly,	I	felt	bitter.	This	victory	was	empty.	It	was	gifted	to	me	on	a	platter	by
an	ugly	farmer,	a	coarse,	uneducated	villager,	a	sly	serpent.	I	looked	back	and
saw	 him	 carrying	 something	 heavy	 on	 his	 shoulders.	 He	 was	 bent	 over	 and
Maricha	was	lifting	a	corner	of	the	heavy	load	and	talking	to	him	as	an	equal.	I
tasted	 mud	 in	 my	 mouth.	 How	 could	 he	 demean	 himself	 by	 associating	 with
such	a	lowly	being?	Maricha	had	been	a	king	once	and	he	was	now	the	uncle	of
a	king.	True,	Bhadra	helped	us	to	victory.	But	was	it	done	the	right	way?	It	was
against	all	the	principles	I	had	learnt	as	a	child.	Would	an	empire	built	on	deceit
and	 slyness	 last?	 Was	 I	 creating	 an	 empire	 of	 truth	 and	 dharma?	 Doubts

lingered	in	my	mind.	I	looked	at	Prahastha.	He	looked	serious.	I	was	not	sure	if
it	was	because	he	thought	like	me	or	because	he	wanted	my	seat.	Kumbha	was
dancing	 with	 a	 crowd	 of	 drunken,	 young	 men,	 to	 the	 tune	 of	 drums	 and	 was
infinitely	 happy.	 Vibhishana	 was	 morose,	 but	 that	 was	 nothing	 new.	 Others
smiled	and	acted	happy.
As	I	entered	the	palace,	the	image	of	a	poor	woman	and	her	four	children
standing	before	the	merchant	king	with	a	begging	bowl,	flooded	my	mind.	The
derisive	 glance	 and	 the	 flick	 of	 Kubera’s	 hands	 fired	 the	 flames	 within	 me.
Butterflies	 fluttered	 in	 my	 stomach.	 I	 saw	 the	 cow	 pen	 and	 glanced	 back	 at
Maricha.	He	glanced	at	it	and	then	smiled	at	me.	I	loved	him	just	for	that	smile.
Kumbha	 was	 oblivious,	 in	 an	 advanced	 stage	 of	 inebriation.	 I	 wanted	 to	 see
Kubera’s	face	as	he	came	out	to	surrender.	I	waited	outside	the	palace,	waiting
for	its	golden	gates	to	open	and	the	King	to	come	out	and	lay	his	crown	at	my
feet.	That	was	how	they	surrendered,	wasn’t	it?
We	waited	for	a	long	time,	but	nothing	happened.	I	wanted	to	barge	in	and
take	 the	 palace	 by	 force.	 At	 least	 that	 would	 quench	 my	 conscience.	 Then,
suddenly,	the	gates	opened.	An	uneasy	hush	fell	upon	the	crowd.	An	old	man
came	out	and	read	from	a	parchment.	“Kubera,	the	King	and	the	God	of	riches,
the	 richest	 King	 of	 the	 world,	 merchant	 par	excellence,	 wishes	 to	 convey	 his
regards	to	his	dearest	younger	brother,	Ravana	and	says,	‘I	wish	to	tell	you	that
I	 was	 always	 willing	 to	 pass	 the	 kingdom	 to	 you	 my	 brother,	 had	 you	 ever
asked	 for	 it.	 I	 am	 sad	 that	 you	 have	 used	 deceitful	 methods,	 unworthy	 of	 a
nobleman	 and	 unworthy	 of	 a	 brother,	 to	 secure	 this	 tiny	 island.	 I	 feel	 great
sadness	that,	instead	of	fighting	with	my	army	as	a	man	and	soldier,	you	chose
to	 poison	 them.	 I	 am	 ashamed	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 used	 deceit	 to	 gain	 your
brother ’s	riches,	spurning	hard	work	and	honest	means.	You	have	failed	both
as	a	soldier	and	as	a	brother.	I	leave	the	kingdom	to	you,	but	I	hope	the	Gods
will	 forgive	 me	 if	 I	 curse	 you	 that	 your	 rule	 also	 will	 end	 with	 betrayal	 and
slyness	 by	 someone	 smarter	 than	 you.	 Adieu,	 my	 brother	 and	 rule	 well	 and
long	li--”
I	 jumped	 into	 the	 room	 and	 grabbed	 the	 parchment	 from	 the	 old	 man’s
hands.	“Where	is	he?”	I	shouted	at	him.	He	stared	at	my	eyes	for	a	full	minute
and	then	pointed	his	finger	to	the	distant,	blue	sea.	There,	with	Kubera‘s	golden
flag	 at	 half	 mast,	 I	 saw	 a	 huge	 ship	 leaving	 port.	 Victory	 dissolved	 in	 myissl
min	 mind.	 I	 wanted	 to	 murder	 Bhadra.	 The	 crowd	 had	 slowly	 started	 to
disappear.	 I	 looked	 at	 that	 sailing	 ship	 tiredly.	 I	 had	 missed	 the	 bastard!	 The
next	day	I	would	be	crowned	the	King	of	Lanka.	I	declared	a	public	festival	to

last	seven	days	to	mark	the	occasion	and	dispatched	a	boat	to	bring	my	family
and	 the	 others.	 Everyone	 was	 running	 around	 to	 make	 it	 a	 grand	 occasion.	 I
searched	 for	 Bhadra	 but	 he	 was	 hidden	 somewhere	 in	 the	 crowd	 milling
around	as	if	they	were	contributing	to	the	arrangements,	but	were	in	fact	only
hindering	the	progress.
I	 sat	 on	 the	 verandah	 on	 the	 first	 floor	 and	 watched	 the	 sun	 set.	 The
western	sea	was	purple	and	the	ships	in	full	sail	were	beautiful.	The	breeze	was
refreshing.	 Thousands	 of	 birds	 made	 music	 in	 the	 garden	 below.	 But	 there
were	too	many	ships	in	the	sea.	Something	was	troubling	me.	Something…
“Your	Highness,	Varuna’s	fleet	is	approaching	our	shores.”	I	was	shocked
out	of	my	lazy	thoughts	by	a	panting	messenger,	standing	a	few	feet	from	me
and	 wheezing	 like	 a	 mad	 dog.	 The	 whole	 palace	 stood	 still.	 There	 went	 my
coronation!	I	ordered	an	end	to	all	celebrations.	Our	Council	met	to	discuss	the
emergency.	We	did	not	have	any	army	to	speak	off.	Kubera	had	taken	most	of
the	 navy	 with	 him.	 The	 rest	 were	 poisoned,	 many	 dead,	 and	 many	 more
violently	 sick.	 So	 we	 were	 left	 with	 only	 300	 odd	 soldiers	 to	 fight	 the	 pirate
king.	I	gained	a	kingdom	without	any	bloodshed	and	this	bothered	me.	I	wanted
to	fight	with	Varuna;	I	wanted	a	war	with	someone.	I	just	could	not	accept	that	I
had	become	a	King	without	any	heroics.	A	kingdom	gained	through	the	leaky
bowels	of	a	cheated	army.	Disgusting!	The	victory	was	hollow	and	I	wanted	to
legitimize	it.	Crushing	Varuna	would	increase	my	prestige	and	set	my	mind	at
peace,	or	at	least	that	was	what	I	hoped.	But	a	fight	would	be	disastrous.	Varuna
would	 swallow	 us	 and	 swarm	 the	 island	 like	 a	 tidal	 wave.	 It	 would	 be	 like
trying	to	dam	the	sea	with	our	bare	hands.
Prahastha,	 as	 usual,	 was	 his	 irritating	 self.	 He	 spoke	 all	 sorts	 of
uncomfortable	 truths	 and	 made	 everyone	 uneasy.	 I	 had	 started	 to	 hate	 this
fellow.	He	was	no	pompous	prude	like	my	Vibhishana,	whose	spurts	of	moral
preaching	I	had	learnt	to	ignore.	Prahastha	made	sense.	His	logic	was	always
crystal	clear.	But	he	behaved	as	if	he	were	a	thinking	machine,	like	Mahabali
had	wanted	me	to	be,	a	walking	brain	with	the	necessary	accessories	attached	to
keep	 it	 functioning.	 Prahastha	 argued	 prudence.	 He	 pointed	 out	 that	 there
wasn’t	a	reasonable	army	to	fight	the	pirate.	If	Varuna	chose	to	leave	his	ships
and	enter	the	city,	there	would	be	large	scale	plunder	and	arson,	mass	rape	and
butchery.	 So	 the	 only	 course	 of	 action	 left	 was	 to	 buy	 peace.	 Surely	 peace
would	 be	 costly	 but	 the	 cost	 of	 war	 would	 be	 more.	 I	 kept	 my	 mouth	 shut.	 I
wanted	to	say	so	many	things	but	nothing	sounded	right.	I	did	not	want	to	go
and	 fall	 at	 the	 feet	 of	 a	 third	 rate	 pirate.	 Finally,	 after	 an	 uneasy	 consent,

Prahastha	was	authorized	to	negotiate	with	Varuna.	I	wanted	to	go	with	him	but
he	curtly	refused.	I	did	not	like	his	brusque	tone	and	reminded	him	that	I	was
the	king.
“It	was	for	that	very	reason	that	I	do	not	want	you	to	come	with	me,”	he
said.	“If	Varuna	took	you	hostage,	Lanka	would	fall	into	his	hands.”
“If	 Varuna	 wanted	 to	 take	 Lanka,	 he	 could	 have	 done	 so	 by	 now,”	 I
countered.	 But	 Varuna	 was	 a	 long-term	 thinker	 and	 a	 steady	 stream	 of	 riches
year	 after	 year	 as	 ransom	 was	 more	 to	 his	 taste	 than	 quick	 plunder.	 By
agreeing	to	pay	him	ransom,	we	were	falling	for	his	game.
“So,	what	is	the	alternative?”	asked	Prahastha.
I	did	not	have	an	answer	so	I	reluctantly	let	him	go.	He	had	the	indulgent
smile	of	a	parent	who	had	got	rid	of	a	stubborn	child.	I	was	left	fuming	when
the	small	boat	carrying	Prahastha	and	his	two	aides	left	for	the	fleet	of	ships
dotting	the	distant	horizon.

I	 was	 edgy	 and	 irritable	 throughout	 the	 evening.
There	was	no	feeling	of	accomplishment,	no	happiness	at
the	 thought	 that	 I	 had	 come	 this	 far	 in	 life.	 I	 wanted	 to
change	 the	 world.	 I	 wanted	 to	 make	 it	 a	 better	 place	 to
live.	I	was	afraid	that	I	had	misplaced	all	those	gilt-edged
dreams	somewhere	along	my	journey	from	that	hut	on	the
edge	of	a	cliff,	to	the	palace	of	Trikota.	To	my	horror,	I
started	 behaving	 like	 an	 ass.	 I	 shouted	 at	 my	 servants,
threw	hot	water	on	the	face	of	a	poor	woman	servant	who
thought	 my	 parched	 throat	 needed	 it	 and	 fetched	 it
without	 my	 orders,	 and	 I	 slapped	 a	 bodyguard	 who	 was
not	standing	in	his	assigned	posture.	I	was	behaving	like
petulant	 two-year-old.	 No	 one	 dared	 complain,	 no	 one
dared	to	come	near.	I	knew	that	my	behaviour	was	odd.	I
had	no	right	to	kick	around	people	who	had	been	willing
to	die	for	me	a	few	hours	before.	But	strangely	enough,	I
enjoyed	the	role	I	played.	It	was	good	to	be	a	king.	Even

if	 it	 was	 just	 to	 kick	 people’s	 butts.	 The	 servants	 might
even	 expect	 to	 get	 thrashed.	 It	 was	 natural	 and	 what
Kubera	used	to	do.
A	 servant	 came	 to	 my	 room	 and	 bowed	 before	 me.	 I	 saw	 that	 his	 knees
were	trembling	and	felt	a	sudden	urge	to	see	his	head	rolling	on	the	ground.	I
had	visions	of	severing	his	head	with	a	graceful	sweep	of	my	sword	and	then
kicking	 his	 head	 with	 my	 left	 foot,	 before	 it	 touched	 the	 ground.	 With	 great
difficulty	I	restrained	myself.
“Your	Highness,	Mayan	 seeks	audience.”	The	last	thing	I	wanted	 was	an
audience	 with	 someone	 who	 made	 a	 living	 counting	 numbers	 and	 taking
measurements	 with	 a	 stick.	 But	 before	 I	 could	 dismiss	 the	 servant,	 Mayan
walked	 in	 with	 a	 sheepish	 grin.	 He	 looked	 like	 an	 owl,	 with	 a	 sheep	 in	 some
remote	ancestral	line,	but	more	like	an	owl	than	a	sheep,	I	decided.	The	servant
withdrew	discretely.	Mayan	came	and	sat	in	a	chair	across	from	me.	He	looked
around	the	hall	with	approval.	At	times,	a	frown	creased	his	forehead	when	his
eyes	met	some	garishly	designed	ceiling	carvings	added	by	that	idiot	Kubera.
He	made	a	noise	with	his	tongue	and	then	shook	his	head	disapprovingly.	He
started	 blabbering,	 “Actually	 Ravana,	 they	 should	 not	 have	 used	 lime	 on	 the
ceiling.	It	fades	to	yellow	with	the	salty	sea	breeze.	If	they	were	particular,	they
would	have	used	coconut	milk	and	honey	while	mixing	the	plaster.	Ideally	the
slate	found.	.	.”
I	watched	in	astonishment,	the	old,	bald	man	was	chattering	like	a	monkey
about	various	technical	details	of	architecture	and	engineering.	And	I	noticed
that	he	called	me	Ravana.	The	last	thing	I	wanted	was	an	unsolicited	master	to
give	me	a	crash	course	in	engineering.	I	wanted	to	get	up,	hold	his	head	down
by	the	scruff	of	his	neck	and	rub	his	nose	on	the	ground.	Instead,	I	asked	with
all	the	civility	I	could	muster,	“	To	what	do	I	owe	the	pleasure	of	your	visit?”	I
hoped	my	tone	did	not	betray	my	emotions	and	that	I	had	said	the	right	thing	to
the	venerable	old	professor	and	architect.
“I	 just	 walked	 by	 and	 thought	 I’d	 have	 a	 word	 with	 you.”	 Five	 minutes
passed	and	I	stood	there	while	the	old	man	muttered	to	himself,	jotting	down
certain	 things,	 punctuated	 by	 exclamations	 and	 cries	 of	 anguish	 or	 joy.	 I
imagined	all	sorts	of	things	happening	to	him,	like	the	huge	pillar	falling	on
his	head,	like	Vishnu	with	a	mask	of	a	lion	jumping	from	his	hiding	place	in
the	 pillar;	 like	 Mayan	 falling	 and	 breaking	 his	 remaining	 two	 teeth.	 Then	 it
struck	 me.	 He	 was	 supposed	 to	 be	 with	 my	 mother	 and	 sister	 and	 that	 rigid

daughter	of	his,	on	the	mainland.	How	had	he	reached	here?	More	importantly,
where	were	my	mother	and	sister?	Had	they	fallen	prey	to	Varuna?	If	anything
had	happened	to	my	mother,	I	would	flay	Varuna	alive,	negotiations	and	peace
treaties	notwithstanding,	irrespective	of	our	relative	strengths	and	Prahastha’s
diplomacy	and	his	intricate	web	of	politicking.
“Shiva,	 Shiva,	 havva,iplomacy	 e	 you	 not	 told	 him	 yet,	 Mayan	 brother?”
The	 knots	 in	 my	 stomach	 untangled	 as	 I	 heard	 my	 mother ’s	 voice.	 I	 was
relieved	 to	 see	 her	 walking	 in	 with	 her	 aristocratic	 bearing.	 ‘When	 was	 your
mother	an	aristocrat,	Ravana?’	I	asked	myself.	The	last	time	I	saw	her,	she	was
a	 poor	 woman	 dressed	 in	 shabby	 rags.	 Now	 she	 was	 dressed	 in	 a	 pure	 white
cotton	 dress.	 My	 sister	 beamed	 behind	 her.	 I	 also	 noticed	 the	 very	 stiff	 lady
standing	 behind	 them,	 her	 gaze	 unwavering,	 meeting	 my	 eyes	 and	 not
flinching.	 I	 had	 yet	 to	 attain	 the	 steely	 all-freezing	 gaze	 of	 a	 king.	 ‘Keep
practicing,	Ravana,’	someone	inside	me	mocked.	She	looked	into	my	eyes	as	if
assessing	 me.	 Mandodari	 –	 the	 engineer ’s	 daughter!	 Stiff	 as	 a	 rod,	 with
straight-jacketed	morals	and	thoughts,	or	that	was	what	Soorpanakha	told	me,
yet	beautiful	like	a	statue.
“What	a	gentleman,	that	Varuna.	It	was	an	absolutely	delightful	voyage,”
Mother	said	indifferently.
Mayan	turned	back	and	said,	“Yes,	yes,	an	absolutely	fascinating	ship.	The
workmanship	was	superb.”
“Brother,	 the	 rickety	 boat	 uncle	 Jambumali	 arranged,	 nearly	 sank	 in	 the
middle	of	the	journey.	It	was	Varuna’s	ship	that	rescued	us.	Oooooo.	.	.it	was	a
fabulous	ship.”	she	cooed.
“So	 where	 is	 Jambumali?	 and	 why	 did	 you	 start	 before	 I	 could	 send
someone	to	fetch	you?”
“Jambumali	 is	 still	 on	 Varuna’s	 ship.	 Varuna	 was	 quite	 happy	 that	 you
have	taken	over	Lanka.	They	say	he	is	a	pirate,	but	he	is	a	man	with	exquisite
manners	 and	 he	 asked	 me	 to	 convey	 his	 regards	 to	 you	 for	 a	 long	 and
illustrious	reign.”
“Prahastha	has	gone	to	talk	to	him.”
“I	will	leave	politics	to	you	men.	Son,	you	are	at	a	marriageable	age	now.
Some	 might	 say	 you	 are	 the	 most	 eligible	 bachelor	 around.	 So	 how	 about
getting	married?”
“I	 don’t	 think	 I	 am	 ready	 for	 it,	 mother,	 I	 have	 a	 country	 to	 rule.	 I	 have
just	started,”	I	protested.
“So.	 .	 .	 I	 asked	 Mayan	 if	 he	 would	 be	 happy	 to	 give	 his	 daughter,

Mandodari,	in	marriage	to	you.”
I	was	flabbergasted.	The	last	thing	I	wanted	was	to	get	married	to	a	stiff
rod.	I	looked	at	her	and	there	was	no	coy	smile,	no	shyness.	She	met	my	gaze
with	 an	 intensity	 that	 shocked	 me.	 Her	 eyes	 were	 dark,	 sharp,	 with	 heavy
eyelashes.	 She	 was	 beautiful	 in	 a	 stiff	 sort	 of	 way.	 There	 was	 a	 kind	 of
haughtiness	in	her.	It	was	as	if	her	father	had	used	a	chisel	and	a	measuring	tape
while	making	her.
“Fortunately	he	agreed,	so	I	have	asked	the	astrologers	to	fix	the	time	for
the	auspicious	occasion.”	When	did	you	succumb	to	this	purely	Deva	custom
of	 asking	 astrologers	 for	 everything,	 mother?	 “I	 think	 we	 should	 give	 you
some	time	to	get	acquainted	with	each	other,	so	shall	we	elders	move	out	into
the	garden?”
Saying	 this,	 she	 went	 out	 without	 meeting	 my	 eyes.	 My	 sister	 lingered
with	a	sly	smile	on	her	lips.	I	wanted	to	run	out,	jump	through	the	window	and
vanish.	Mandodari,	now	what	kind	of	a	name	was	that?	Mayan,	you	could	have
done	better	than	that.	There	is	no	point	in	making	engineering	marvels	if	you
do	not	know	how	to	give	a	nice	name	to	your	daughter.	She	stood	there	without
moving,	her	eyes	boring	into	me.	I	 felt	 naked.	I	was	uneasy.	‘Hey,	isn’t	it	the
girl	who	is	supposed	to	be	nervous?	Get	a	grip,	Ravana,	you	are	a	King,	albeit
through	a	revolution	of	indigestion,’	I	reminded	myself.
“Mayan	brother,	I	have	something	important	to	talk	to	you,”	my	mother
called	 out	 from	 the	 garden.	 “And	 you	 Soorpanakha,	 go	 and	 unpack	 your
things.	Hurry.”
“Suizee	 sore,	 sure,	 the	 garden	 layout	 is	 marvellous,	 but	 the	 watering
systems	 need	 some	 modification.	 .	 .”	 I	 watched	 in	 horror	 as	 Mayan	 stumbled
out	 mumbling	 something.	 My	 sister	 gave	 me	 another	 of	 her	 knowing	 smiles
and	vanished	in	a	fluff	of	swirling	clothes.	‘Don’t	go	away.	Stay	here	old	man,	I
like	 you,	 I	 love	 you.	 Wait	 and	 we	 shall	 discuss	 the	 intricacies	 of	 Gandharva
architecture	or	a	Vanara	temple	design.	Stay	and	let	us	talk.	What	was	that	you
were	saying	about	the	ceiling	pattern?	Don’t	go	away;	stay	here	and	talk.	.	.’
“This	room	has	a	nice	view.”	she	said.	Like	father	like	daughter.
“Yes.”	 said	 I.	 After	 that	 she	 remained	 silent	 and	 I	 searched	 my	 mind	 for
something	to	say,	a	single	thing	to	say.	‘So	this	is	how	your	family	life	is	going
to	be	Ravana?	She	will	stare	at	the	wall	and	you	will	stare	everywhere	else	like
a	dumb	ass.	Should	I	ask	her	about	the	things	she	has	studied	or	should	I	ask
her	to	sing	a	song?	Does	she	play	an	instrument?	What	if	she	declines	to	talk	or
does	 not	 answer	 my	 questions?	 What	 if	 I	 break	 one	 of	 those	 intricate	 social

customs	 by	 asking	 the	 wrong	 question?’	 The	 room	 was	 getting	 increasingly
stuffy	and	humid.	This	was	the	wrong	way	to	get	married;	I	was	convinced	of
that	by	now.
“Well.	.	.er.	.	.	I	learned	archery	under	Brahma	and	I	love	music.	My	hobby
is	to	find	a	cure	for	children’s	ailments	and.	.	.”	I	stammered	and	stuttered	and
stopped.
She	turned,	crossed	her	arms	and	looked	at	my	eyes	steadily.	“My	father
told	me	you	are	going	to	be	my	husband	and	as	I	am	an	obedient	daughter,	I
agreed.	I	know	all	the	Vedas	of	the	Devas,	and	I	have	studied	Deva	and	Asura
history.	 I	 have	 also	 studied	 engineering	 and	 architecture	 under	 my	 father.	 I
write	poetry	and	I	paint.	I	love	hunting	and	I	am	a	sharp	shooter.”
No	one	asked	whether	I	was	ready	to	marry	a	walking	encyclopaedia.	She
stopped	and	I	waited	to	see	whether	there	was	anything	more.	She	might	know
Chinese,	 might	 even	 know	 how	 to	 build	 ships	 but	 was	 being	 modest	 and	 not
telling	 me	 everything.	 On	 the	 first	 night	 she	 might	 say,	 ‘Surprise!	 I	 actually
know	how	to	recite	the	Chandagyo	Upanishad	 backwards,	 but	 kept	 it	 a	 secret
when	we	met	in	that	nice	room	with	a	view.	But	now	that	we	are	so	intimate,	I
feel	we	should	have	no	secrets.	As	an	obedient	wife,	I	will	also	tell	you	that	I
feel	the	Atharva	Veda	has	many	tribal	and	Asura	elements	in	it.’
I	felt	small,	uncultured,	unaccomplished.	I	knew	I	was	a	good	warrior,	but
so	 were	 the	 300	 soldiers	 trained	 under	 Rudraka.	 I	 was	 trained	 under	 Brahma
but	I	had	rejected	most	of	that	formal	education.	I	wanted	the	interview	to	end.	I
was	worried	about	the	treaty	Prahastha	was	going	to	sign	with	that	pirate	and
how	we	were	going	to	cope	after	coughing	up	the	princely	ransom.	Then	I	got
a	 shock.	 Mandodari	 started	 singing.	 It	 was	 a	 melodious	 song,	 glorifying	 the
rule	of	Mahabali,	and	she	sung	it	very	well.	Her	voice	was	rich	and	her	rhythm
perfect,	rising	and	ebbing	at	the	correct	places.	It	was	flawless	but	lacked	soul.
It	was	too	perfect	to	have	soul.	There	was	no	passion.	Mandodari	did	not	mean
what	 she	 was	 singing,	 it	 was	 just	 an	 exercise,	 mechanical,	 emotionless,
passionless,	but	perfectly	rendered.	No	maestro	could	have	faulted	her	singing
but	somewhere	it	jarred.
As	 suddenly	 as	 she	 had	 started,	 Mandodari	 stopped	 singing.	 An	 uneasy
silence	came	up	between	us.	I	 did	not	know	what	to	do.	Should	I	compliment
her?	 Applaud	 her	 singing?	 Pat	 her	 back	 and	 feel	 the	 smooth	 texture	 of	 her
skin?	 Or	 just	 smile?	 Maybe	 I	 should	 sing	 a	 song	 in	 return?	 ng	 hatI	 was
confused	and	stood	there	miserably,	waiting	for	someone	to	appear	and	rescue
me.	 Earlier	 I	 had	 been	 irritated	 by	 all	 the	 idiots	 passing	 by	 my	 room	 and

coming	 to	 talk	 to	 me.	 Now	 I	 desperately	 prayed	 for	 someone,	 even	 old	 man
Mayan,	to	come	and	get	me	out	of	this.
“So	 you	 have	 got	 acquainted.	 Next	 Sunday	 is	 your	 marriage	 and	 I	 have
sent	messengers	to	invite	those	of	our	relatives	who	can	be	reached.	The	rest
we	 will	 inform	 later.”	 Mother	 had	 come	 into	 the	 room	 and	 the	 engineer	 was
standing	 at	 the	 door	 and	 tut-tutting	 at	 the	 ornamental	 pillar	 near	 the	 window.
My	sister	was	at	the	doorway,	beaming	at	her	future	sister-in-law.
“But	moth--”	I	was	cut	short	by	the	sudden	noise	of	shuffling	feet	and	the
room	 went	 quiet.	 Prahastha	 entered	 with	 Jambumali	 and	 Maricha	 walked
behind.	 I	 was	 annoyed	 at	 the	 sudden	 intrusion	 into	 what	 was	 essentially	 a
private	affair	but	was	relieved	at	the	same	time.	Seeing	my	mother,	Prahastha
bowed	with	folded	hands	and	enquired	about	her	health.	Maricha	went	straight
to	my	mother	and	with	a	twinkle	in	his	eyes	said,	“So	sister,	the	match-making
is	over,	eh?	And	see,	how	he	is	blushing.”
I	 wanted	 to	 strangle	 him.	 Prahastha	 stared	 straight	 at	 the	 ocean	 and
Jambumali	 suddenly	 found	 it	 convenient	 to	 start	 a	 conversion	 with	 Mayan.
Mandodari	stood	staring	at	me	with	an	intensity	that	made	me	stutter.	Kumbha
and	Vibhishna	came	running	into	the	room	and	Kumbha	hugged	me,	his	twoday	stubble	scratching	my	face.	He	reeked	of	toddy.
“Hmm.	.	.	if	you	don’t	mind,	will	you	ladies	please	leave	us	poor	men	to
tackle	some	important	affairs	of	state?”
My	sister	went	out	with	a	pout,	and	my	mother	came	and	planted	a	kiss	on
my	forehead	before	leaving	the	room.	I	turned	red	as	I	saw	a	smile	twitching	at
the	corners	of	Mandodari’s	mouth.	Mayan	lingered	as	if	he	wanted	to	stay	and
admire	the	architecture,	but	Maricha	took	the	professor	out	of	the	room	with	a
kindness	 which	 only	 he	 could	 show.	 We	 sat	 there,	 the	 silence	 building,	 and
finally	 when	 I	 thought	 Prahastha	 might	 go	 mad	 and	 start	 singing	 raunchy
songs,	Maricha	walked	in,	rolling	his	eyes	and	shaking	his	head.
“If	your	antics	are	over,	Maricha,	let’s	start	doing	some	work,”	Maricha
smiled	at	Prahastha’s	attempt	to	get	even.	“It	was	a	tough	bargain.	The	pirate	is
a	tough	negotiator.	I	know	you	are	not	going	to	like	it	but	we	need	time	to	build
our	 strength.”	 Prahastha	 paused.	 I	 grew	 pale.	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to	 hear	 what	 the
terms	were.	I	was	itching	for	war.	But	reason	told	me	that	foolhardy	heroism
would	not	take	me	anywhere.	Many	Asuras	perished	that	way	and	now	come	to
life	only	in	country	ballads.
“And	what	have	you	conceded?”	I	asked.
“Spare	the	accusatory	tones	for	later.	You	are	speaking	to	a	Council	and	I

was	fully	authorized	by	you	to	negotiate	as	I	deemed	fit.”
“You	 wind	 bag!	 Have	 you	 forgotten	 there	 is	 no	 Council	 now?	 I	 am	 the
King	and	you	are	my	Prime	Minister.	If	I	ask	you	questions,	you	answer	them
without	showing	off	your	superior	education.”	I	was	trembling	with	rage	and
had	 drawn	 my	 sword.	 Prahastha	 stood	 there	 cool	 and	 unflustered,	 an	 arm
resting	 on	 the	 hilt	 of	 his	 sword.	 It	 was	 like	 he	 was	 baiting	 me,	 daring	 me	 to
make	a	move.
“Please	 let’s	 be	 civil	 with	 each	 other,”	 Jambumali	 said.	 Maricha	 was
staring	at	me,	an	ugly	scowl	crossing	his	otherwise,	smiling	face.
‘Why	 do	 I	 say	 things	 like	 that	 to	 a	 man	 old	 enough	 to	 be	 my	 father?’	 I
slowly	 put	 the	 sword	 back	 and	 sat	 down	 on	 my	 chair.	 ‘Your	 throne,	 Ravana,
your	throne,’	I	reminded	myself.
Prahastha	also	sat	down	and	when	he	spoke	I	noticed	thatI	notypeitali	he
had	 lost	 that	 tint	 of	 righteousness	 which	 always	 irritated	 me.	 “Two	 lakh	 gold
coins,	20,000	gold	coins	every	third	month,	seven	of	our	best	ships,	one	third
of	our	total	pepper	produce,	one	fifth	of	cardamom	and	cloves,	and	a	quarter
of	our	revenue	from	the	customs	we	collect	from	our	ports.”
There	 was	 total	 silence	 in	 the	 room	 as	 Prahastha	 read	 the	 signed
parchment.	 I	 heard	 Maricha	 swear	 under	 his	 breath	 and	 Kumbha	 shifted	 his
legs	uneasily.
“What	do	we	get	in	return	for	these	small	favours?”	I	hoped	my	sarcasm
would	not	provoke	another	reaction	from	the	old	nut.	‘Only	you	react,	Ravana,
only	 you	 rave	 like	 a	 lunatic.	 Prahastha,	 he’s	 an	 aristocrat.’	 I	 clenched	 the
armrests	of	my	chair	so	hard	that	it	would	have	hurt	them.
“We	 are	 in	 no	 position,	 Your	 Highness,	 to	 demand	 anything.”	 Prahastha
continued	 in	 a	 dry,	 flat	 voice,	 “He	 offered	 us	 protection	 from	 all	 forces.	 He
offered	to	police	the	seas	to	make	it	safe	from	pirates.”
A	 derisive	 laughter	 followed	 this	 remark	 and	 even	 Prahastha	 smiled
before	continuing.	“He	will	withdraw	the	siege	as	soon	as	he	receives	the	two
lakh	 gold	 coins.	 He	 has	 promised	 not	 to	 attack	 the	 city.	 The	 coins	 have	 to	 be
delivered	 to	 the	 ships	 he	 chooses.	 His	 delegates	 will	 inspect	 our	 warehouses
and	 granaries	 to	 assess	 the	 present	 produce	 and	 assist	 our	 accountants	 in
computing	the	share.”
Again	 an	 uneasy	 silence	 followed.	 Everyone	 computed	 the	 settlement	 in
their	minds.	None	of	us	was	sure	how	much	we	would	have	to	give.	We	had	no
idea	 how	 much	 the	 state	 treasury	 held,	 how	 much	 our	 warehouses	 and
granaries	had,	what	the	tax	collection	was,	the	toll	collection,	or	anything	else.

We	 warriors	 considered	 such	 things	 beneath	 our	 notice,	 best	 left	 to	 those
inferior	 creatures	 called	 accountants.	 The	 room,	 with	 the	 exception	 of
Jambumali,	did	not	contain	any	experienced	administrators.	I	did	not	know	that
ruling	 a	 country	 would	 be	 tougher	 than	 capturing	 it.	 I	 did	 not	 know	 why
Prahastha	 agreed	 to	 all	 the	 terms	 without	 having	 any	 idea	 of	 what	 we
possessed.
“You	 might	 wonder	 why	 I	 negotiated	 all	 this	 without	 actually	 knowing
how	much	we	have	in	the	first	place.	It	was	tough.	I	assumed	Varuna	had	spies
in	 the	 government,	 who	 would	 have	 been	 regularly	 supplying	 information	 to
him	about	our	country’s	economy,	even	during	Kubera’s	time.	So	I	thought	that
Varuna	 would	 make	 us	 an	 offer	 which	 would	 be	 stiff	 but	 manageable.	 I
negotiated	from	there.”	Prahastha	looked	up	as	he	said	that.
“So	 you	 assumed	 the	 pirate	 would	 be	 generous	 enough	 to	 give	 us	 an
affordable	settlement.”	Kumbha	was	baiting	Prahastha.
“I	think	that	was	the	best	anyone	could	have	done	given	the	circumstances.
Now	 let’s	 start	 our	 work	 of	 appeasing	 the	 pirate,”	 Jambumali	 intervened,
before	Prahastha	could	react,	and	I	gave	him	a	grateful	look	before	I	stood	up
and	brought	the	meeting	to	a	close.
Prahastha	 walked	 towards	 me	 with	 long,	 easy	 strides.	 “Ravana,	 should	 I
arrange	 for	 your	 coronation?	 Would	 you	 like	 to	 combine	 it	 with	 your
marriage?”	he	asked	me	in	a	whisper.
‘And	save	some	expenses	in	the	process?’	 I	 managed	 to	 nod	 my	 head	 in
assent.
“Your	 Highness,	 we	 will	 sit	 and	 study	 our	 position.”	 he	 said	 loudly	 and
the	 conversation	 stopped.	 “Perhaps	 you	 would	 like	 to	 retire	 if	 you	 feel	 tired,
Your	Highness.”
“No,	I	will	join	you.	Get	the	officials	who	are	in	charge	of	the	treasuries.”
I	said	and	saw	Maricha	smiling.

17	The	silver-tonguedI	notage
Bhadra
I	was	sitting	near	the	kitchen,	waiting	for	someone	to	come	and	take	me	to
my	master.	The	day	passed,	with	people	moving	in	clusters	through	the	street,
busily	chattering	with	each	other,	discussing	politics	and	their	future.	I	wanted
to	go	and	join	the	crowd	and	gain	information	about	the	general	mood	of	the
man	 on	 the	 street.	 But	 I	 was	 afraid	 to	 move	 lest	 I	 miss	 the	 messenger	 who
would	 surely	 come	 to	 take	 me	 to	 my	 master.	 My	 master	 was	 going	 to	 come
himself	to	meet	me.	He	would	hold	me	close	and	thank	me	for	all	that	had	been
done.	I	would	say	that	it	was	all	Shiva’s	doing.	That	I	was	but	a	small	pawn	in
his	game.	I	dreamt	and	dreamt	but	no	one	came.	I	sat	there,	sweat	pouring	down
my	face	in	two	channels	and	soaking	my	chest.	Yet	I	dared	not	move.	My	king
had	 already	 forgotten	 me.	 I	 could	 not	 believe	 it.	 No,	 he	 was	 busy,	 he	 was
waiting	for	his	family	members	to	disperse	and	then	he	would	call	me.	But	by
evening	I	was	not	that	sure.	I	was	afraid	to	go	and	show	my	face.	Who	was	I?	A
lowly	creature,	a	small	worm.	I	felt	like	spitting	on	myself.
There	 was	 no	 point	 in	 waiting.	 I	 felt	 betrayed.	 I	 had	 risked	 my	 life,	 had
been	tortured,	and	now	I	lay	here	forgotten,	thrown	out	like	a	curry	leaf	after
use.	I	tried	to	push	the	thought	from	my	mind	and	walked	without	direction.	I
heard	that	Varuna’s	fleet	had	surrounded	the	island	and	there	was	going	to	be	a
war.	So	what?	It	did	not	concern	me.	Let	the	princes	and	warriors	bother	about
it.	What	I	wanted	was	a	drink.	Suddenly	I	remembered	Mala.	It	was	possible	she
would	be	sleeping	with	someone	else	now.	If	so,	I	was	going	to	drag	him	out,
kicking	and	screaming,	and	throw	him	out.
I	lost	my	way	in	the	labyrinth	of	streets	and	it	was	quite	late	by	the	time	I
found	her	house.	I	was	quite	drunk	by	that	time,	having	stopped	at	three	toddy
shops	en	route.	A	mangy	dog	was	sleeping	on	the	doormat	and	I	kicked	it	with

all	 the	 viciousness	 and	 strength	 I	 could	 muster.	 It	 vanished	 into	 the	 night,
howling	with	pain	and	cursing	me	in	doggie	language.	I	pounded	the	door	and
peppered	 it	 with	 a	 stream	 of	 abuse.	 By	 the	 time	 she	 opened	 the	 door,	 I	 had
already	 reached	 her	 great,	 grandparents’	 habits	 in	 detail.	 Some	 heads	 had
popped	 out	 from	 the	 neighbouring	 houses	 and	 I	 showered	 them	 with	 some
choice	vocabulary.
Mala	 opened	 the	 door	 and	 poured	 a	 pail	 of	 water	 over	 my	 head.	 The
coolness	of	the	water	stunned	me	and	she	dragged	me	inside	by	my	waist	cloth,
dripping	wet.	By	the	time	we	reached	her	bed,	I	was	crying	like	a	baby	and	she
was	cooing	meaningless	words.	I	slept	with	my	head	buried	in	the	cleavage	of
her	 heaving	 bosom,	 with	 her	 fingers	 tracing	 paths	 through	 my	 hair	 and	 her
heartbeat	in	rhythm	with	my	snoring.	Later,	when	the	palace	bells	tolled	twice
in	the	early	morning,	I	woke	and	reached	for	her.	I	slept	again,	fulfilled.	I	woke
much	 later	 with	 a	 hangover.	 The	 street	 was	 busy	 with	 vendors	 shouting,
pushcarts	zig-zagged	between	pedestrians	and	bullock	carts.	Through	the	open
window,	 the	 smell	 of	 sweets	 from	 a	 nearby	 shop	 rushed	 in	 and	 I	 vomited.	 I
watched	the	puddle	forming	designs	on	the	expensive	silk	sheets	of	Mala’s	bed.
Then	 she	 came,	 cursing	 me,	 with	 a	 pail,	 a	 wooden	 mug	 and	 a	 coir	 brush.	 A
million	needles	exploded	in	my	head.
I	slept	the	whole	day,	except	for	a	few	minutes	when	I	was	force	fed	some
gruel.	About	midnight	I	woke	to	find	Mala	lying	beside	me	nude,	sleeping	like
a	 baby.	 I	 caressed	 her	 and	 slowly	 succeeded	 in	 arousing	 her.	 Then,	 with	 a
sudden	force	which	made	her	cry	out,	I	entered	her.	Images	flooded	my	mind.
Scenes	of	torture	by	Vikrama	mixed	with	the	roaring	sound	of	the	waterfall	of
the	Poorna,	the	taste	of	blood	in	my	mouth,	the	eyes	of	Ravana,	that	thankless
bastard,	all	mixed	to	form	a	collage	which	was	frightening	and	fascinating	at
the	same	time.	To	my	shame	I	found	that	my	organ	had	shrunk	and	was	lying
limp	like	a	decaying	old	banana.	Mala	sat	up	.	Mavaand	looked	at	me	with	open
contempt,	pity	and	horror.	I	tried	entering	her	again,	but	she	shoved	me	away
and	 stood	 up.	 I	 felt	 ashamed	 of	 my	 nudity,	 my	 impotence,	 and	 ran	 out	 of	 the
room	covering	my	groin.
Somewhere	on	the	outskirts	of	the	city,	a	lone	jackal	howled	a	painful	cry
and	 I	 felt	 like	 joining	 him.	 You	 impotent,	 good-for-nothing	 bastard.	 Bhadra,
you	 fool!	 You	 wanted	 to	 dine	 with	 kings	 and	 change	 history;	 you	 wanted	 to
give	up	your	life	for	your	race;	for	the	life	you	irrevocably	lost	on	the	banks
of	the	Poorna.	This	is	what	is	left	of	you,	forgotten	and	cast	away.
“Get	inside.”	Her	voice	was	soothing	as	her	fingers	ran	through	my	hair.	I

stood	 up	 slowly,	 unashamed	 of	 my	 nakedness,	 not	 caring	 if	 anyone	 else	 saw
me	and	walked	like	an	obedient	puppy	into	her	home.
Three	 days	 after	 I	 entered	 her	 life	 again	 like	 a	 lost	 dog	 found,	 she
suggested	 we	 go	 to	 the	 local	 vegetable	 market.	 We	 walked	 towards	 the	 sea,
towards	 the	 smell	 of	 fish,	 rotting	 vegetables,	 cow	 dung,	 sweets	 and	 snacks
frying	in	oil.	The	setting	sun	coloured	her	smooth	cheeks	a	bright	orange	and
her	eyes	laughed	when	she	spoke.	A	small	drop	of	sweat	swayed	precariously
on	the	tip	of	her	nose.	I	wanted	to	lick	it	then	and	there.	My	eyes	wandered	and
touched	 her	 eyes,	 brow,	 tresses,	 small	 straight	 nose,	 full	 kissable	 lips,	 the
cleavage	 between	 her	 round	 breasts	 and	 further	 down,	 her	 exposed	 navel.	 I
locked	my	hand	with	hers	and	looked	into	her	smiling	eyes	and	at	that	moment
I	knew	that	I	had	fallen	in	love.
I	stood	behind	her,	holding	the	basket	while	she	haggled	with	the	hawkers.
Lost	in	my	daydreams,	I	did	not	register	the	implication	of	the	arguments	and
opinions	of	the	people	in	the	market.	As	we	walked	back,	the	happy	and	easy
romantic	mood	vanished	as	she	grumbled	about	the	prices.	I	felt	irritated	and
snapped	 at	 her	 to	 keep	 quiet.	 She	 reacted	 with	 surprising	 ferocity	 and	 began
cursing	me	and	every	man	in	the	world,	“Politics,	politics,	why	can’t	you	men
stop	 ruining	 our	 lives	 with	 petty	 politicking	 and	 fights?	 It	 costs	 twelve
sovereigns	 for	 a	 dozen	 bananas.	 He	 has	 fleeced	 us	 but	 says	 it’ll	 go	 up	 again.
The	 new	 king	 has	 imposed	 further	 taxes	 and	 additional	 tolls	 on	 the	 highway
which	adds	to	the	cost.	Damn	politicians,	damn	the	king.”
“Hush	Mala,	you	cannot	speak	about	the	king	like	that.	If	someone	hears,
we	could	get	reported.”	A	few	heads	turned	and	stared	at	us.	I	was	not	amused
and	was	afraid.	I	did	not	want	to	be	reported	for	treason.
“You	keep	your	mouth	shut.	I	do	not	care	for	any	king.	They	all	are	the
same.	 What	 is	 so	 fancy	 about	 the	 new	 one?	 Deva,	 Asura,	 Gandharva,	 half
castes,	they	are	all	the	same.	They	only	worry	about	how	to	glue	their	fat	asses
to	the	throne	and	screw	the	people.	They	talk	big,	like	the	emancipation	of	the
Asuras,	 getting	 even	 with	 the	 Devas,	 preservation	 of	 culture,	 and	 all	 that
humbug.	But	finally	it	boils	down	to	the	same	thing.	Screw	the	people,	enjoy	a
luxurious	life	in	the	palace	and	cling	to	power.”
“What	do	you	understand,	Mala?	Don’t	you	know	there	is	a	siege?”
“What	 siege?	 Why	 can’t	 your	 King	 put	 Varuna	 in	 his	 place?	 He	 is	 a
coward,	 your	 Ravana.	 He	 got	 his	 kingdom	 because	 someone	 poisoned
Kubera’s	soldiers.	Spineless	cowards	–	that’s	what	your	people	are.	He	is	not
ready	to	wage	a	war	with	a	bloody	pirate	and	he	claims	to	be	the	saviour	of	the

Asuras.	Shiva	help	the	Asuras	if	Ravana	is	an	example	of	the	kind	of	hero	the
Asura	 race	 can	 expect	 to	 produce	 today.	 King	 indeed!	 He’s	 just	 a	 spineless
rascal.”
The	 intensity	 of	 her	 frustration	 and	 disillusionment	 was	 unsettling.	 I
winced	at	her	reference	to	the	poisoning.	I	did	not	know	it	would	create	such	a
big	slur	on	Ravana’s	victory,	but	I	was	sure	I	would	have	done	the	same	thing
even	 if	 I	 had	 known.	 What	 use	 would	 it	 have	 been	 if	 Ravana	 had	 bravely
foughtbrag	 s	 Kubera	 and	 died	 valiantly?	 Between	 glorious	 martyrdom	 and
deceitful	 victory,	 I	 would	 always	 choose	 the	 second.	 Too	 many	 Asuras	 had
become	brave	martyrs	and	the	addition	or	deletion	of	a	Bhadra	to	their	ranks
would	 not	 make	 the	 slightest	 difference.	 I	 had	 a	 grudging	 admiration	 for	 the
Vishnu	clan,	that	devious	clan	which	had	produced	many	great	Deva	generals.
They	had	raised	deceit	to	the	heights	of	the	divine.
We	walked	home	in	an	uneasy	silence.	I	was	surprised	that	I	had	thought
of	her	house	as	our	home.	Sometime	earlier	I	had	realized	that	my	attraction
towards	her	was	not	merely	physical.	Nor	was	I	sure	how	she	felt.	Perhaps,	I
was	 just	 one	 among	 the	 scores	 of	 lovers	 who	 frequented	 her	 house.	 I	 was
jealous.	I	wanted	her	completely.	She	was	a	whore	but	that	did	not	bother	me.	I
was	 beyond	 such	 moral	 shackles.	 I	 was	 sure	 I	 was	 broad-minded	 enough	 to
ignore	such	small	details.
As	we	turned	the	corner,	I	saw	an	affluent	man	caressing	the	manes	of	his
horse	in	the	courtyard	of	her	house.	As	we	approached,	he	turned	towards	us
and	smiled.	I	saw	Mala’s	face	light	up	and	in	a	trice	she	handed	me	the	basket
she	was	carrying	and	ran	into	the	waiting	man’s	embrace	with	a	yelp	of	joy.	I
stood	 there	 in	 the	 growing	 darkness,	 too	 stunned	 to	 move,	 as	 the	 couple
smooched	without	any	shame.	I	was	still	standing	there	with	my	hands	full	of
vegetables,	 when	 they	 walked	 into	 their	 nest	 and	 closed	 the	 door.	 I	 saw	 the
horse	jeering	at	me.	I	was	angry	as	I	had	never	been	in	my	life.	I	wanted	to	kick
open	the	door	and	drag	the	man	out	of	our	home,	with	his	head	banging	on	the
steps.	 I	 wanted	 to	 thrash	 Mala	 black	 and	 blue	 for	 behaving	 so	 shamelessly	 in
front	of	me.
As	emptiness	filled	me,	I	thought	how	foolish	I	must	look,	standing	in	the
middle	 of	 a	 street,	 in	 front	 of	 a	 whore	 house,	 with	 both	 hands	 full	 of
vegetables.	I	felt	a	wave	of	self-pity	wash	over	me	and	anger	and	frustration	at
the	 unfairness	 of	 life.	 I	 imagined	 the	 horse	 watching	 me	 again,	 his	 jaws
systematically	 chewing	 the	 grass	 with	 an	 expression	 of	 disdain.	 I	 walked
towards	 him	 and	 emptied	 the	 vegetables	 in	 front	 of	 him.	 I	 watched	 with

satisfaction	as	he	started	munching	them	with	evident	pleasure.	I	felt	small	and
mean,	 foolish	 and	 ridiculous	 as	 I	 played	 out	 my	 frustrations	 as	 the	 spurned
lover.
I	walked	towards	the	market.	The	curfew	had	been	lifted	and	there	were
no	 restrictions	 like	 those	 imposed	 during	 Kubera’s	 time.	 Anyone	 could	 walk
freely.	As	I	neared	the	market,	I	suddenly	felt	I	needed	a	drink.	I	wanted	to	get
drunk,	but	not	because	I	had	lost	my	lover.	She	had	never	been	a	lover	in	the
first	place,	just	a	whore.	I	passed	many	people	in	various	stages	of	inebriation.
It	was	funny	to	think	that	each	drunkard	who	passed	me	had	once	had	Mala,	the
celebrated	whore	of	Lanka,	the	great	Asura	slut	–	I	spat	on	a	wall.	I	imagined
what	Mala	would	be	doing	now	with	her	lover	in	bed,	my	bed.	I	badly	needed	a
drink	so	I	entered	the	inn	on	the	street	corner	and	walked	right	into	the	middle
of	 a	 fight.	 A	 tough-looking	 man	 was	 sitting	 at	 the	 counter,	 chewing	 pan	 and
watching	the	fun	with	an	impassive	face.	He	might	have	been	used	to	drunken
tiffs.	I	approached	him	shyly	and	he	raised	an	eyebrow	in	response.	I	searched
in	my	purse	and	discovered	some	copper	coins.	I	could	not	remember	where
the	coins	had	come	from,	perhaps	they	were	my	pay	from	Kubera’s	kitchen.
“What	are	they	fighting	about?”	I	asked	but	did	not	expect	an	answer.
“Politics.	They	do	not	have	anything	better	to	do	than	fight	about	it,	lazy
idiots.	What	will	you	have,	palm	or	wine?”
“Er…actually	what	I	want	is	a	job.”	I	had	not	intended	to	ask	that	question
and	 my	 thoughts	 until	 that	 moment	 were	 only	 on	 getting	 a	 drink.	 Before	 he
could	 reply,	 I	 hastily	 added,	 “I	 am	 Bhadra,	 and	 I	 used	 to	 work	 in	 Kubera’s
kitchens,	they	say	I	am	a	good	cook.”
“Your	 fanc">rdsy	 preparations	 will	 be	 useless	 here.	 If	 you	 can	 cook	 up
simple	 dishes	 like	 fish	 curries	 or	 chicken	 fries,	 you	 can	 expect	 a	 temporary
position.	 By	 the	 way,	 I	 am	 Ilango,	 and	 my	 family	 has	 been	 running	 this	 inn
since	 Mahabali’s	 time,	 when	 this	 God	 forsaken	 island	 was	 a	 colony	 of	 the
Emperor.”
So	 I	 joined	 Ilango’s	 inn	 and	 soon	 found	 it	 was	 a	 hot	 bed	 for	 political
discussions	which	usually	ended	in	a	bloody	fight.	The	proprietor	never	took
part	 in	 any	 discussions	 but	 gave	 tacit	 encouragement	 by	 not	 barring	 anyone
from	 talking	 politics.	 The	 sly	 Ilango	 had	 decided	 that	 these	 discussions	 were
actually	good	for	his	business	and	he	quietly	added	the	expense	of	repairing	or
replacing	any	broken	furniture,	to	the	bill	of	the	customers	responsible	for	the
mess.	 Between	 serving	 and	 cooking,	 I	 listened	 to	 various	 customers	 debating
heatedly	 about	 the	 affairs	 of	 state.	 This	 was	 the	 voice	 of	 the	 common	 Asura

people,	who	were	incapable	of	changing	things,	but	who	were	forced	to	bear
whatever	 burden	 the	 ruling	 class	 dumped	 on	 their	 backs.	 The	 crowd	 visiting
Ilango	 were	 ordinary	 folk	 with	 significantly	 little	 education	 or	 money.	 I
suspected	 that	 the	 upper	 middle	 class	 of	 merchants	 or	 government	 officers,
considered	 the	 present	 regime	 boorish.	 The	 poor	 and	 lower	 middle	 class
seemed	 to	 hope	 that	 Ravana	 would	 bring	 about	 change	 for	 the	 better.	 Many
identified	 with	 the	 poor	 boy	 who	 had	 risen	 from	 poverty.	 They	 were	 sure	 he
would	not	just	concentrate	on	trade	and	traders	as	Kubera	had	done,	but	dole
out	goodies	to	the	poor	as	well.	Many	of	the	older	men	remained	skeptical	as
they	seen	many	regimes	and	palace	coups.	They	claimed	that	things	would	get
worse.	Usually,	there	were	several	fights	between	the	pro-Ravana	men	and	the
pro-Kubera	 gang.	 But	 there	 was	 eager	 anticipation	 regarding	 the	 new
government’s	policies.
I	 was	 fascinated	 by	 the	 discussions	 and	 wished	 that	 an	 optimistic	 view
would	 prevail,	 but	 knowing	 Ravana	 better	 than	 all	 these	 people,	 the	 future
didn’t	seem	so	bright.	The	pangs	of	love	I	still	had	for	Mala	and	the	frustration
I	 felt	 because	 of	 her	 blatant	 betrayal,	 added	 to	 my	 already	 miserable	 view	 of
life.	 I	 wished	 to	 return	 to	 my	 past	 and	 live	 a	 simple	 life	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 the
river	 Poorna,	 tending	 my	 cows,	 farming	 my	 small	 piece	 of	 land,	 loving	 and
fighting	with	my	sweet	fat	wife,	playing	with	my	daughter	and	walking	with	my
friends	 to	 the	 toddy	 shop	 or	 dancing	 at	 the	 temple	 festival.	 I	 missed	 all	 that	 I
had	 known.	 But	 I	 missed	 Mala	 the	 most	 and	 kept	 an	 eye	 on	 her	 house.	 It
enraged	 me	 that	 the	 tall,	 handsome	 man	 frequented	 it	 often.	 Once	 I	 tried	 to
follow	him	but	he	lost	me	somehow.	I	wandered	through	the	labyrinths	of	the
bazaar	and	was	late	getting	to	work.	I	got	a	mouthful	from	Ilango	and	lost	half
a	day’s	pay	in	the	process.	The	man	was	an	enigma.	He	looked	confident	and
strong;	he	had	the	stride	of	a	warrior;	and	easily	appeared	and	disappeared	at
will;	 but	 to	 my	 eyes,	 he	 appeared	 to	 be	 constantly	 on	 guard	 as	 if	 he	 had
something	 to	 hide.	 I	 had	 decided	 he	 was	 the	 villain	 of	 my	 story	 and	 vowed	 I
would	find	him	and	do	the	needful.
Slowly	but	perceptibly,	public	opinion	changed.	I	could	feel	the	tension	in
the	 streets;	 in	 the	 inn	 and	 in	 the	 way	 people	 walked.	 Jambumali,	 the	 new
minister	of	finance	and	trade,	had	imposed	fresh	taxes.	He	sent	messengers	to
all	the	trade	guilds	and	shops	and	even	addressed	a	joint	meeting	of	the	guilds
to	 explain	 the	 dire	 necessity	 of	 increasing	 tax	 percentages.	 Everyone	 was
implored	to	bear	with	the	government.	They	were	assured	the	taxes	would	be
withdrawn	once	Varuna	was	paid	off.	No	one	believed	him.

Soon	 Jambumali	 became	 the	 most	 hated	 person	 in	 the	 whole	 of	 Lanka.
The	road	toll	was	increased	three-fold	and	farmers	were	brought	into	the	tax
net.	 The	 salaries	 of	 the	 armed	 forces	 were	 cut	 by	 half	 and	 many	 government
servants	were	literally	thrown	out	of	office.	Prices	soared	sky	high.	Because	of
the	 trade	 embargo,	 trade	 came	 to	 a	 standstill.	 It	 was	 rumoured	 that	 Praournn
hastha	had	sold	Lanka	to	the	pirate	Varuna.	The	regime	became	the	most	hated
in	 the	 long	 history	 of	 the	 island.	 But	 only	 a	 few	 hated	 Ravana.	 He	 was	 the
innocent,	 romantic,	 young	 man	 who	 had	 established	 an	 Asura	 kingdom,	 but
was	in	the	grip	of	a	vicious	coterie.	Three	months	passed	in	a	state	of	tension.
There	were	small	riots	in	various	part	of	the	city	and	in	one	instance,	a	mob
lynched	a	tax	collector	to	death.	The	Government	reacted	swiftly	and	brutally.
The	 army,	 under	 the	 personal	 leadership	 of	 General	 Rudraka,	 swept	 the
residents	 off	 a	 street,	 most	 of	 whom	 were	 innocent	 bystanders,	 and	 dragged
them	into	the	torture	chambers.	Rudraka	became	the	image	of	fear.	He	rode	his
black	horse,	surrounded	by	heavily	armed	bodyguards,	and	imposed	a	reign	of
terror.
The	business	at	the	inn	also	fell	and	I	had	a	lot	of	free	time.	Once	I	visited
Mala	but	found	her	house	locked.	I	was	told	she	had	vanished	a	few	days	ago.	I
felt	sad	and	relieved	at	the	same	time.	And	there	ended	a	chapter	in	my	life,	I
thought	despondently.	To	add	to	the	woes,	the	retreating	monsoon	failed.	The
harvest	 was	 poor	 and	 people	 from	 the	 neighbouring	 villages	 thronged	 the
temples	 of	 the	 capital,	 where	 free	 food	 had	 been	 provided	 since	 time
immemorial.	But	there	were	no	longer	any	patrons	and	many	temples	fell	into
disrepair.	 The	 king	 had	 announced	 that	 his	 marriage	 with	 chief	 engineer
Mayan’s	daughter,	had	to	be	postponed	to	avoid	hardship	to	the	people.	Except
for	 a	 few	 derisive	 laughs,	 it	 did	 not	 draw	 any	 positive	 response	 from	 the
populace.	What	the	king	did	was	his	private	affair,	as	long	as	he	did	not	spend
any	 public	 money,	 or	 so	 it	 was	 said	 in	 the	 Asura’s	 unwritten	 code	 of
governance.	Like	so	many	codes	and	laws,	this	too	was	meant	to	be	violated.
By	the	end	of	the	winter,	a	trivial	incident	sparked	large	scale	rioting	in
the	 city.	 No	 one	 would	 have	 thought	 that	 Mayan,	 the	 unassuming	 bumbling
professor,	now	chief	engineer	of	the	regime,	would	be	the	reason	for	rioting.
But	the	professor	touched	a	raw	nerve	in	the	highly-strung,	tense	and	starving
populace,	when	he	chose	to	show	his	engineering	skills.	It	was	a	clear	winter
morning	 when	 I	 was	 surprised	 from	 my	 sleep	 by	 a	 hullabaloo	 in	 the	 street.	 I
struggled	 from	 my	 cot	 when	 the	 uproar	 became	 unbearable.	 There	 was	 a
strange	whining	noise	outside.	Sleepy	and	irritated,	my	long-drawn	yawn	was

cut	off	in	the	middle	by	the	sight	of	Mayan	inside	a	vimana,	a	flying	machine.
He	was	doing	sorties	in	the	sky	and	was	quietly	enjoying	it,	quite	oblivious	to
the	rage	he	was	generating	below.	The	huge	crowd	was	shouting	at	him	in	awe
and	horror.
It	was	Pushpaka,	 the	 famed	 flying	 machine	 made	 by	 the	 old	 Mayan,	 the
present	one’s	grandfather.	I	had	only	heard	about	the	existence	of	a	prototype
developed	 by	 Kubera,	 with	 the	 help	 of	 some	 earlier	 Mayan,	 but	 his	 untimely
death	in	a	horse	race,	led	the	millionaire	merchant-king	to	shelve	the	project.
Kubera	had	spent	a	fortune	trying	to	develop	something	like	this	but	he	could
never	get	the	thing	to	fly.	As	I	watched	in	astonishment,	the	Pushpaka	 made	a
graceful	 turn	 and	 vanished	 towards	 the	 palace.	 Then	 the	 murmurs	 started.
People	started	saying	all	sorts	of	things.	It	was	then	I	saw	him	–	Mala’s	lover.
He	was	standing	on	top	of	a	wall,	shouting	something.	I	wanted	to	hear	what	he
was	saying	so	I	wove	my	way	through	the	crowd.	The	noise	subsided	slowly,
except	for	occasional	murmurs	and	whispers	and	some	hissing.	There	was	an
air	of	expectation.	Then	my	rival	exploded	in	fury.
“This	is	absolute	nonsense	my	dear	brothers!	Do	we	deserve	this?	While
we	starve,	your	King	rolls	in	luxury…”	The	crowd	roared	in	approval.	“Ravana
is	your	nemesis,	do	we	need	such	a	ruler?”
ontle	“No!	No!	No!”	I	found	myself	joining	the	chorus.
“While	 your	 children	 starve,	 the	 jokers	 inside	 the	 palace	 choose	 to	 fly.”
He	 stopped	 and	 looked	 around,	 waiting	 for	 silence.	 “He	 defies	 the	 Gods.	 Not
even	the	Gods	fly	and	the	king	doles	out	money	to	mad	scientists	to	make	flying
machines.”	 The	 crowd	 booed.	 “When	 your	 children	 die	 of	 hunger,	 when	 your
fields	 are	 littered	 with	 the	 corpses	 of	 your	 kin,	 when	 your	 cattle	 die	 of	 thirst,
your	 ruler	 will	 fly	 above	 the	 waste	 you	 have	 become	 and	 take	 an	 aerial	 view.
Why?”
“Why?	Why?”	a	thousand	voices	echoed	his	question.
“Because	he	is	afraid	of	you.	He	is	afraid	to	come	down	and	mix	with	you
common	folk.	Shame	on	Ravana!”	he	roared	with	a	powerful	punch	to	his	own
chest.
“Shame!	Shame!”	the	mob	echoed	and	did	the	same.
He	 says	 it’s	 because	 of	 Varuna	 that	 your	 life	 is	 miserable.	 Who	 is	 this
Varuna	 and	 what	 right	 has	 he	 over	 the	 people	 of	 Lanka?	 He	 is	 a	 pirate.	 It	 is
your	 misfortune,	 nay,	 your	 weakness,	 that	 you	 have	 a	 coward	 like	 Ravana	 as
your	King.”
There	was	movement	at	the	rear	of	the	mob	and	I	jumped	up	and	down	to

see	what	was	going	on.	It	was	a	small	scuffle	but	nothing	of	importance	and	I
turned	 back	 to	 the	 speaker.	 “Did	 we	 invite	 Ravana	 here?	 Did	 we	 ask	 him	 to
come	and	rule	us?”
“No!	No!	No!”	the	crowd	roared.
“The	old	king	was	a	rogue	but	he	was	a	brave	rogue.”
“Hear!	Hear!”
“He	kept	pirates	at	bay.	He	robbed	you,	but	he	robbed	with	a	conscience.
He	bent	you	but	did	not	break	you.	After	all	his	luxuries,	he	left	something	for
you	 to	 eat.	 This	 coward	 Ravana,	 earned	 a	 kingdom	 through	 deceit,	 then	 he
imposed	his	devilish	rule	upon	you.	He	will	rob	the	milk	from	a	baby’s	mouth.
He	will	drink	your	blood.	He	will	sell	your	wives	if	he	thinks	that	will	subsidise
his	luxurious	lifestyle.	He	is	weak,	cruel	and	above	all,	a	coward.”
I	was	mesmerized	by	his	oratory	skills.	He	was	perfect,	his	voice	rising
and	 falling	 with	 perfect	 timing,	 his	 gestures	 powerful,	 and	 I	 could	 sense	 the
crowd	swaying	with	emotion.
“Arise	 my	 fellow	 countrymen	 of	 Lanka.	 We	 Asuras	 do	 not	 want	 cruel
weaklings	as	our	rulers.	Let	us	remove	this	imposter	and	dump	his	coterie	into
the	sea.	Then	we	will	fight	Varuna	and	teach	him	his	place.	Let	us	march	to	the
palace	and	drag	this	demon	from	his	throne.	Let	us	mar--”	There	was	a	sudden
silence	and	I	saw	him	fall	forward	slowly.	His	chest	became	crimson	and	it	was
then	 I	 saw	 the	 blunt	 end	 of	 an	 arrow	 jutting	 from	 his	 clutch	 after	 he	 had
removed	it	from	his	chest.	As	the	crowd	watched	in	horror,	horsemen	entered
from	 all	 sides	 and	 started	 hacking	 the	 crowd.	 There	 was	 a	 widespread
pandemonium.	 I	 saw	 Rudraka	 at	 full	 gallop,	 his	 black	 horse	 trampling
everyone	in	his	way	towards	the	fallen	orator.	I	wanted	to	run	from	danger	but
was	drawn	towards	the	centre	of	the	drama.	I	wanted	to	see	the	end	of	my	rival
and	ran,	ignoring	the	pain	as	many	running	in	the	opposite	direction	collided
with	 me.	 By	 the	 time	 I	 neared	 the	 wall,	 my	 feet	 had	 been	 stamped	 on	 many
times.	 I	 saw	 Rudraka	 was	 trembling	 with	 rage	 and	 frustration.	 There	 was	 no
bleeding	 man	 lying	 prone.	 Rudraka	 hit	 a	 soldier	 with	 the	 hilt	 ofth	 et	 h	 his
sword	 in	 frustration.	 Ignoring	 the	 blood	 which	 sprayed	 from	 the	 wounded
soldier,	 Rudraka	 barked	 instructions	 to	 his	 other	 men	 to	 find	 the	 rebel.	 He
could	not	have	gone	far.	I	was	disappointed.	I	fervently	prayed	that	the	arrow
had	done	its	job	and	the	man	would	die	in	a	few	hours.	But	I	knew	I	could	not
count	on	it.	I	was	never	lucky	in	my	life.	Then	I	saw	flames	rising	in	different
parts	 of	 the	 city.	 Lanka	 was	 burning.	 And	 it	 would	 not	 be	 the	 first	 time	 the
island	city	would	burn.

18	Brother’s	brother
Ravana
“There	are	reports	of	riots	in	the	eastern	side	of	the	city	and	some	rogues
have	 burned	 the	 artisans’	 village	 and	 hacked	 the	 chief	 artisan	 to	 death.	 Many
lives	have	been	lost.	Rudraka	has	managed	to	curb	the	riots	in	the	northern	and
western	 sides,	 but	 the	 riots	 have	 spread	 to	 outlying	 villages	 as	 well.	 Temples
have	been	torched,	granaries	looted,	women	raped.	The	situation	is	grim	in	the
central	district.	The	tribes	of	the	southern	forests	have	joined	the	looting	and
have	committed	widespread	arson	in	the	southern	parts	of	the	city.
Rebels	 hold	 sway	 in	 the	 south	 and	 Vidyutjihva	 has	 proclaimed	 himself
king.	 He	 has	 started	 collecting	 a	 major	 part	 of	 the	 farm	 tax.	 Sumali	 and
Malyavan	have	rushed	to	the	south	to	curb	the	rebellion	and	if	possible,	capture
Vidyutjihva.	We	have	also	dispatched	search	parties	to	find	the	whereabouts	of
the	 missing	 prostitute,	 Mala.	 We	 are	 awaiting	 confirmation	 to	 see	 if	 the	 man
who	 visited	 Mala,	 was	 the	 same	 spy	 Bhadra,	 who	 escaped	 from	 us	 earlier.
Rudraka	is	sure	that	he	sighted	Bhadra	during	the	commotion,	but	he	vanished.
It	 appears	 that	 Vidyutjihva,	 Mala	 and	 Bhadra	 are	 conspirators	 in	 a	 wellrehearsed	 scheme	 to	 topple	 the	 government.	 Permission	 is	 sought	 from	 the
King	to	impose	strict	and	ruthless	measures	to	curb	the	rebellion.	Orders	may
be	 issued	 to	 the	 army	 to	 proceed	 to	 the	 southern	 forests	 and	 take	 back	 the
territory	lost	to	the	rebels.”
Prahastha	 stopped	 reading	 and	 stared	 at	 me	 as	 if	 expecting	 a	 ready
solution.	He	looked	as	if	he	was	almost	happy	at	the	turn	of	the	events.
Maricha,	Jambumali	and	I	sat	in	silence.	A	decision	had	to	be	taken.	I	did
not	want	to	use	excessive	force	in	curbing	the	rebellion.	I	wasn’t	even	sure	if	it
was	as	serious	as	Prahastha	made	it	out	to	be.	I	was	hurt	that	my	own	people
had	 taken	 up	 arms	 against	 me.	 Why	 did	 these	 idiots	 not	 understand	 that

governance	is	not	simple?	That	the	government	needed	taxes	to	run	the	State.
Was	I	not	supposed	to	be	the	saviour	of	the	Asuras?	Unless	they	allowed	me	to
do	so,	how	could	I	consolidate	the	kingdom	and	recover	the	lost	Asura	pride?
My	people	spent	more	time	fighting	each	other	than	the	common	enemy.	These
nitwits	could	handle	change.	I	wanted	to	run	a	model	state	and	build	a	kingdom
where	everyone	was	prosperous,	a	strong	Asura	state	which	could	take	on	the
Devas.	I	want	to	drive	the	Devas	out	of	India,	and	do	many	great	things	for	my
people.	 And	 these	 thankless	 rabble	 go	 and	 rebel.	 The	 stupidity	 of	 the	 people
was	astounding.	Didn’t	they	know	that	the	present	difficulties	they	were	facing
was	for	a	brighter	future?	Why	did	they	not	comprehend	that	I	had	to	buy	time
to	garner	enough	strength	to	take	on	Varuna?	Why	did	they	not	remain	patient
and	give	me	some	time?
“Crush	the	rebellion	with	force.	No	traitor	shall	be	spared.”	I	looked	away
towards	the	sea	as	I	pronounced	damnation	on	my	own	people.	‘For	the	greater
good,	of	my	people,’	I	consoled	myself.	Then	it	started,	the	bloody	voice	inside
me.	 ‘But	 then,	 that	is	what	every	tyrant	 in	history	 has	told	himself.	Ravana,	I
know	you	are	a	fool,	but	you	still	sth	et.	urprise	me.	So,	for	greater	good,	you
will	do	some	lesser	good,	like	chopping	off	a	few	heads,	splitting	some	families,
and	endorsing	wholesale	slaughter.	Bravo!	You	have	become	a	real	ruler.’	How
I	want	to	squeeze	the	breath	out	of	the	mocker	within	me.
“I	want	full	authorization	to	curb	the	rebellion,	your	written	approval	with
the	royal	seal	on	the	order.	And	I	do	not	want	to	answer	any	silly	questions	of
the	 Council	during	the	 operation.	I	shall	submit	a	report	after	 I	 have	 finished
the	 job.”	 Prahastha’s	 demeanour	 was	 irritating	 to	 say	 the	 least.	 I	 was	 getting
tired	of	the	whole	exercise.	It	was	as	if	the	Council	did	not	believe	I	would	stick
to	my	decision.	It	was	frustrating,	more	so	because	I	was	afraid	they	were	right.
“You	 will	 have	 whatever	 you	 want.”	 I	 prayed	 this	 meeting	 would	 end.
Prahastha	 made	 me	 an	 elaborate	 bow.	 There	 was	 a	 smile	 playing	 about	 the
corners	 of	 his	 mouth.	 One	 by	 one	 everyone	 left	 the	 room.	 I	 felt	 lonely,	 very
lonely.	‘You	were	born	lonely,	Ravana,	and	you	will	live	and	die	so.’	I	could	see
smoke	 curling	 towards	 the	 distant,	 bleak,	 grey	 sky.	 There	 could	 be	 lives
burning	 there.	 My	 sense	 of	 fairness	 and	 righteousness	 that	 I	 believed	 I
possessed,	were	going	up	in	smoke	all	around	me	and	my	palace.	I	know	it	was
too	early	in	my	career	as	king	to	feel	a	sense	of	loss.	I	had	a	long	way	to	go,
many	more	people	to	torture,	lives	to	ruin,	more	justification	to	give	myself,
and	more	terrible	things	to	do.	It	was	too	early	to	play	the	suffering	hero	in	the
grip	 of	 remorse.	 Was	 a	 vacancy	 for	 shipping	 clerk	 in	 any	 of	 Varuna’s	 ships

still	available?
“Ravana,	I	want	to	talk	to	you	about	something	important.”
“Yes	mother,	what	is	it?”	I	was	irritated	and	did	not	want	to	be	disturbed
but	at	the	same	time	I	was	relieved	that	I	had	someone	to	talk	to.
“I	want	to	talk	to	Mayan.”
“So	talk,	why	you	are	asking	my	permission?”
“Stop	playing	the	fool,	you	are	the	King	of	Lanka	now.”
“Thank	you	mother,	for	reminding	me,	I	keep	forgetting.”
“You	do	not	like	Mandodari?”
“Does	it	really	matter?”
“Perhaps	not	to	you,	but	it	may	matter	to	her.”
“Then	ask	her.”
“I’m	 fixing	 the	 marriage	 this	 fortnight.	 If	 you	 want	 any	 special	 friends,
you	should	invite	them.”
“Do	kings	have	friends?”
“You	are	the	first	King	I	know,	so	I	don’t	know	the	answer	to	that.”
I	 glared	 at	 her	 and	 then	 stared	 outside.	 I	 could	 hear	 her	 walking	 out
swiftly.	I	should	have	been	elated	over	the	match	or	perhaps	wary	about	it.	But
there	 was	 no	 emotion.	 My	 mind	 was	 blank.	 Darkness	 had	 engulfed	 the	 city
which	 stared	at	 me	with	a	hundred	eyes.	Slowly,	a	sense	of	inadequacy	swept
through	me.	I	had	no	control	over	things	happening	around	me.	Not	long	ago	I
had	thought	of	controlling	my	destiny,	even	holding	the	destiny	of	others	in	my
hands.	Now	I	had	been	left	in	the	grip	of	a	thankless	kingdom	which	wanted	to
crush	me.	A	cold	salty	breeze	from	the	sea	blew	past	and	made	the	small	lamp
in	 the	 room	 flicker	 and	 die	 out.	 I	 could	 hear	 the	 waves	 breaking	 against	 the
shore.	The	fog	over	the	sea	slowly	lifted.	The	lights	in	the	distance	looked	as	if
they	were	dancing,	Varuna’s	ships	perhaps.	A	plan	formed	in	my	head.	I	wanted
action.	 I	 could	 not	 sit	 and	 let	 others	 plan	 my	 life.	 I	 turned	 away	 from	 the
window	and.	.	.
“Who	 is	 that?”	 I	 drew	 my	 sword	 drawn	 from	 its	 sheath.	 A	 small	 figure
stood	 silhouetted	 against	 the	 grey	 light	 of	 the	 door	 frame.	 It	 moved	 into
darkness	with	a	rapidity	that	threw	me	off	as	mew	haty	eye	struggled	to	adjust
to	the	light.	I	jumped	into	the	corner,	waving	my	sword	around.	With	my	back
to	the	wall,	I	had	to	guard	only	the	front.	I	didn’t	have	to	worry	about	a	back
thrust.
“Your	Highness,	it’s	me.”
“Who	are	you?”

Silence….	If	it	was	a	foe,	he	would	not	have	spoken	and	given	away	his
position.	I	relaxed,	but	only	a	bit.	“I	won’t	hurt	you.	Come	into	the	light.”	I	told
him	as	I	heard	the	shuffling	of	feet.	Then	as	I	watched	the	door	frame,	where	I
expected	him	to	appear,	a	firm	hand	gripped	my	wrist	and	whispered	in	my	ear,
“Forgive	 me	 your	 highness.	 .	 .”	 The	 voice	 continued	 as	 he	 blocked	 my	 kick
aimed	at	his	groin,	“I’m	not	your	enemy	but	your	servant,	believe	me.”
I	relaxed	a	bit.	I	could	have	shaken	him	off	and	delivered	a	punch	to	his
nose	which	would	have	left	him	unconscious.	But	something	in	his	voice	made
me	trust	him.	Perhaps,	if	Prahastha	was	here,	he	would	have	told	me	that	a	king
should	never	trust	anyone,	not	even	himself.	My	sword	flew	from	my	hand	and
hit	the	wall	with	a	clank	and	dropped	to	the	floor.	I	was	surprised	by	the	sudden
kick	which	had	knocked	the	sword	from	my	hand.	Blasted	Prahastha	–	I	think
he	was	right	as	usual.	But	the	hand	which	held	my	wrist	had	gone	and	I	stood
with	my	nerves	taut.	My	body	assumed	a	combat	posture	and	the	lessons	learnt
in	 Mahabali’s	 forests,	 were	 sending	 signals	 through	 my	 nerves.	 I	 heard	 my
sword	 moving	 and	 aimed	 a	 kick	 in	 that	 direction.	 Pain	 waves	 shot	 from	 my
toes	as	they	made	contact	with	the	walls.	But	I	was	back	in	combat	position	in	a
trice,	ignoring	the	pain.	Then	I	saw	him	in	the	flickering	light	of	the	corridor.
The	 face	 was	 oddly	 familiar,	 like	 that	 of	 a	 snake	 –	 a	 hooded	 cobra,	 ready	 to
strike.
“Bhadra.	.	.”
“At	your	service,	Your	Highness.”
“How	dare	you?!”
“Forgive	me	your	Highness	but	please	hear	me	out.”
I	stood	there,	contemplating	what	to	do.
If	I	had	killed	him	then,	history	would	have	been	different.	Ah	history.	.	.	it
would	always	be	different	for	different	people	and	take	its	own	course.	Perhaps
nothing	 matters	 one	 day.	 On	 this	 battlefield	 where	 I	 lie	 bleeding	 to	 death,	 I
assume	I	have	created	a	great	chapter	in	history;	lived	a	hero’s	life;	and	died	a
villain’s	 death;	 or	 vice	 versa.	 But	 I	 might	 have	 been	 only	 having	 illusions	 of
grandeur.
This	 war	 with	 a	 small	 prince,	 Rama,	 and	 his	 monkey	 men,	 which
devastated	my	life	and	laid	waste	to	all	the	things	I	had	achieved,	could	be	too
insignificant	 in	 the	 history	 of	 mankind.	 When	 did	 I	 start	 bothering	 about
history?	History	starts	with	me	and	ends	with	me.	Perhaps	the	jackal	eating	my
limbs	might	be	surprised	to	know	that	he	is	swallowing	a	part	of	history.	How
does	it	matter?	How	does	anything	a	poor	man	like	me,	who	played	Emperor

and	buffoon	intermittently	and	sometimes	together,	did	or	had	forgotten	to	do,
matter	in	this	indifferent,	cruel	world,	which	has	existed	before	and	shall	exist
long	after	I	end,	dissolved	in	the	earth.
But,	I	was	too	young	to	know	then	as	I	am	too	old	to	care	now.	So	I	heard
him	 out.	 I	 heard	 as	 he	 took	 me	 through	 the	 dark	 lanes	 of	 his	 past	 and	 the
tangled	by-lanes	of	his	present.	When	he	wept,	I	became	indifferent.	When	he
accused	 me	 of	 disowning	 him	 after	 I	 had	 conquered	 Lanka,	 I	 was	 really
surprised.	Was	it	not	my	own	plan	which	had	succeeded?	What	had	this	man	to
do	 with	 any	 of	 it?	 But	 I	 felt	 some	 sympathy	 for	 him,	 like	 I	 felt	 for	 a	 puppy
which	was	run	over	by	my	step-brother ’s	chariot	and	kept	howling	through	the
night.	I	could	keep	this	man	as	a	puppy	dog,	just	to	spite	Prahastha.	The	thought
was	pleasurable.	I	smiled	and	that	idiot	Bhadra	thought	I	had	relented	at	last.	He
fell	at	my	feet	and	started	kissing	them.	I	was	aghast.	Why	would	st.hada	man
demean	 himself	 so?	 I	 tried	 to	 pull	 my	 feet	 back	 but	 then	 it	 was	 strangely
pleasurable.	 I	 felt	 a	 twinge	 of	 happiness	 within.	 But	 suddenly,	 guilt	 washed
away	 that	 tiny	 bit	 of	 pleasure	 and	 I	 shook	 him.	 I	 felt	 contempt	 for	 him	 and
myself.
“You	are	my	personal	servant.	Not	a	royal	aide	or	anything	fancy,	just	a
plain,	personal	servant.	You	will	do	what	I	bid.”
“I	will	serve	you	like	a	dog,	Your	Highness.”
Something	inside	 me	snapped.	Did	he	read	my	thoughts?	Could	he	have
felt	the	contempt	brimming	inside	me?	My	puppy,	my	plaything,	Bhadra.	I	felt
small	in	my	own	estimation.	No,	I	would	treat	him	as	a	friend,	as	an	equal,	well
not	exactly	equal,	but	almost.	A	slave	with	equal	rights	as	his	master?	I	would
die	 laughing.	 ‘But	 Ravana,	 look	 at	 his	 face,	 look	 at	 those	 frail	 arms	 and	 pot
belly,	 is	 he	 your	 equal?	 Bhadra	 is	 the	 scum	 of	 the	 earth,	 the	 lowliest	 of	 the
creatures	 you	 are	 destined	 to	 rule.’	 No,	 he	 is	 the	 representation	 of	 my	 poor
Asura	race.	He	is	my	bridge	to	the	common	man.	He	will	bring	me	the	views
of	my	people	and	I	will	rule	with,	well,	justice	and	prosperity	for	all.
“You	may	go	now.”	He	elaborately	bowed	and	slowly	left	the	room.
What	 I	 needed	 was	 action.	 I	 went	 over	 the	 plans	 I	 had	 left	 halfway.	 I
chewed	over	the	details	and	somewhere	in-between,	I	fell	asleep.	I	woke	to	see
dawn	 breaking	 over	 the	 hills.	 But	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to	 get	 up	 from	 my	 bed	 to
another	weary	day.	Another	day	in	which	accounts	of	death	and	arson	would	be
presented	 by	 pompous	 clerks,	 a	 new	 day	 where	 I	 would	 see	 the	 people	 I	 had
vowed	to	protect,	killing	each	other	and	praying	for	my	death.	Another	day	in
which	I	would	learn	some	more	irritating	administrative	lessons	from	the	likes

of	Prahastha.	A	day	in	which	I	would	be	pestered	by	my	mother	to	marry	that,
what	 was	 her	 name	 –	 the	 daughter	 of	 the	 nutty	 scientist	 –	 Mandodari	 or
something.
A	lone	soldier	paced	at	the	palace	gates.	How	I	envied	him.	He	just	had	to
walk	to	and	fro	until	noon	and	then	go	home,	eat	his	lunch,	sleep	or	possibly
make	love	to	his	wife	or	mistress,	get	drunk	in	the	evening	and	then	go	to	sleep
like	a	hog.	Life	was	simple	and	sweet.	But	perhaps	 it	was	not	that	 simple.	He
could	 have	 an	 unfaithful	 wife,	 a	 drunkard	 for	 a	 son,	 even	 a	 nagging	 mother,
and	a	sick	father,	to	take	care	of.	But	I	loved	the	sensation	of	being	jealous,	so	I
preferred	the	first	version	of	his	story.	I	wanted	to	call	the	watchman	and	give
him	an	impossible	task.	Just	to	wreck	his	life.	Perhaps	the	power	that	kingship
brings,	is	just	that,	the	ability	to	wreck	other	people’s	lives.	That	was	its	only
pleasure.
“Your	 marriage	 is	 fixed	 for	 tomorrow.”	 I	 was	 startled	 from	 my	 joyful
reverie	about	wrecking	the	watchman’s	life.	It	took	a	few	seconds	to	recognize
my	mother.
“Why	not	today	mother?”
“You	are	dripping	sarcasm.	You	have	never	spoken	to	me	like	that.	This
kingship	has	gone	to	your	head.	It	was	I.	.	.”
“.	.	.who	struggled	to	raise	us,	who	went	hungry	to	feed	us,	who	went	na-no	a	son	should	not	say	that,	but,	hmm,	will	it	be	okay	if	I	say	deprived	of	good
quality	clothing,	to	clothe	us.	.	.”
“Enough.	Your	majesty,	you	are	forgetting	a	poor	mother.	.	.”
“.	.	.who	carried	me	nine	months	in	the	womb	and	delivered	me	through
pain...”	She	stood	there	sobbing.	I	was	shocked	that	I	had	spoken	to	her	like	that
in	the	first	place,	without	any	provocation.	I	took	her	face	in	my	hands	and	she
looked	at	me,	challenging	me	with	those	burning	black	eyes	to	defy	her	love.
“Please	 make	 the	 arrangements	 for	 the	 marriage	 mother.	 The	 burden	 of	 the
kingdom	 is	 now	 getting	 too	 heavy	 for	 your	 poor	 son	 to	 carry	 and	 I	 was	 not
myself	when	I	spoke	to	you.”
“You	 have	 just	 started	 son,	 asta	 the	 kinnd	 I	 hope	 you	 will	 not	 become
worse	than	this.	Tomorrow	evening,	as	I	said.	Good	day	son.”	She	walked	out
with	unfaltering	steps	and	before	remorse	and	shame	could	strike	me	in	waves,
I	called	for	Maricha.	He	was	too	old	to	fight	in	the	street	and	so	he	was	the	only
senior	 officer	 available	 in	 the	 palace.	 Besides,	 he	 was	 the	 one	 I	 loved	 and
respected.	 He	 never	 thrust	 his	 opinions	 on	 one,	 unlike	 the	 know-everything
Prahastha.

“You	 called	 me,	 Your	 Highness?”	 As	 I	 waved	 him	 to	 sit,	 he	 sat	 down
directly	in	front	of	me.
“Uncle,	call	me	Ravana,	at	least	in	private.”
“Okay.	Kumbha	has	returned.	”
“Let’s	call	him.”
“Before	that,	I	want	to	say	something	important,	Ravana.	Your	brother	is
not	who	you	think	he	is.”
“What	 is	 wrong	 with	 Kumbha?	 Or	 are	 you	 taking	 about	 Vibhishana,	 the
pious	one?”	I	asked,	feeling	affectionate	about	my	youngest	brother.
“I	 will	 talk	 about	 Vibhishana	 some	 other	 day.	 The	 oaf	 is	 a	 matter	 of
immediate	 concern.”	 I	 laughed	 at	 his	 reference	 about	 Kumbakarna.	 “It’s	 no
laughing	matter,	Ravana.	He	has	picked	up	bad	habits.	He	has	a	weakness	for
girls,	we	all	know.	As	long	as	he	is	discreet,	it	should	not	worry	us.	He	visits
taverns	and	drinks	country	liquor	like	an	elephant	and	he	never	bothers	to	pay.”
“The	 boy	 is	 just	 having	 some	 fun.	 Send	 someone	 to	 clear	 the	 debts	 and
charge	 it	 to	 my	 personal	 account.	 I	 mean,	 whatever	 is	 left	 from	 the	 account
which	 we	 collected	 before	 launching	 the	 attack	 on	 Lanka.	 I	 do	 not	 want	 my
brother ’s	drinking	habits	to	be	subsidized	by	the	State.”
“It	 is	 not	 only	 that,	 Ravana.	 He	 has	 taken	 to	 drugs.	 He	 has	 a	 group	 of
friends	who	make	things	out	of	bhang.	They	also	process	jellies	from	the	Soma
plant.	 I	 think	 Kumba	 was	 enticed	 by	 them.	 .	 .I	 sent	 two	 of	 my	 best	 officers	 to
track	what	Kumbha	was	up	to.	They	have	confirmed	what	I	had	suspected	for
the	past	few	days.	Ravana,	most	of	the	time	the	idiot	is	knocked	out.”
“He	 makes	 friends	 fast.”	 But	 then,	 Kumbha	 had	 always	 been	 a	 friendly
soul,	rather	like	a	big	dog	waiting	to	be	petted.
“I	don’t	know	whether	they	can	be	called	friends.	They	are	using	the	oaf.
And	the	idiot	doesn’t	know	it.”
“So	what	do	you	want	me	to	do,	Uncle?”
“Give	him	some	official	post.	Give	him	something	to	do.”
“I	don’t	want	to	be	accused	of	nepotism.”
“Don’t	speak	nonsense,	Ravana.	Most	of	the	people	holding	official	posts
are	your	relatives,	like	Prahastha	and	me.”
“That	 is	 different.	 You	 have	 long,	 administrative	 experience	 and	 have
ruled	kingdoms	once.	Kumbha	and	Vibhi	are	just	children.”
“And	 you	 want	 them	 to	 remain	 just	 that?	 Don’t	 you	 want	 them	 to	 grow
up?	 Ravana,	 are	 you	 saving	 the	 posts	 for	 your	 children?	 Are	 you	 afraid	 that
your	brothers	will	be	a	challenge	to	your	dynasty?”

“Now	 you	 don’t	 speak	 nonsense.	 You	 know	 I’m	 not	 like	 that.	 I’m	 not
interested	in	ruling	forever.	I	have	ideals	and	principals.	.	.”
“The	throne	you	are	sitting	on	has	a	way	of	twisting	the	principals	to	suit
the	occupant,	my	son.”
“Why	is	everyone	accusing	me	of	becoming	corrupted	by	power?	What
power	do	I	have?	Just	because	I	have	a	city	to	rule,	and	half	of	them	want	me
dead,	it	does	not	mean	I	have	to	prove	I’m	not	the	ignoble	Asura	despot	they
want	 me	 to	 be.”	 ‘But	 why	 I	 should	 share	 the	 power	 with	 idiotser	 e	 t	 like	 my
brothers?’
“If	you	are	sure	you	are	not	and	will	not	be	corrupted	by	power.	.	.”
“Stop	 talking	 like	 Prahastha.	 I	 called	 you	 to	 discuss	 a	 plan	 I	 want	 your
opinion	on	and	I	want	Kumbha	also	to	be	with	me.	Bhadra.	.	.”	The	speed	with
which	Bhadra	appeared	surprised	me.	Was	he	listening	outside?	How	far	could
I	trust	him?	“Go	and	fetch.	.	.er.	.	.Prince.	.	.Kumbhakarna.”
“Why	are	you	taking	such	creatures	into	your	personal	staff?”
I	 laughed	 at	 Maricha’s	 scornful	 tone	 as	 Bhadra	 ran	 out.	 “A	 king	 has	 his
own	reasons.”
“Your	personal	spy,	eh?”
“Why	not?	He	is	ordinary,	can	merge	into	any	crowd.	And	he	is	ruthless
to	the	point	of	sadistic	cruelty.	He	seems	to	have	suffered	much	and	has	nothing
to	lose.”
Maricha	suddenly	asked,	“Hey,	he	was	supposed	to	be	the	traitor	who	had
started	 it	 all,	 isn’t	 it?”	 But	 before	 I	 could	 answer,	 Kumbha	 entered.	 He	 was
looking	drunk.
“Kumbha,	you	look	a	little	forlorn.	What’s	wrong	with	you,	son?”
“Why	do	you	ask	that?	I’m	not	the	king	and	don’t	have	to	please	anyone.”
“If	you	want	to	sit	here	and	play	the	neglected,	poor,	younger,	brother	of
the	rich,	cruel	king,	do	it	as	long	as	it	pleases	you.	Uncle,	let’s	go	out	and	have
a	stroll	in	the	garden	and	leave	this	melodramatic	idiot.”
“No,	no,	Ravana,	I	was	just	joking.	This	uncle	of	ours	would	have	sung
many	 songs	 about	 my	 debaucheries	 to	 you.	 Just	 a	 little	 fun,	 that’s	 all,	 my
brother.	What’s	your	plan?”
I	told	them	my	plan.	There	was	total	silence.
“But	tomorrow	is	your	marriage.	It	will	be	risky.”	I	looked	at	Maricha’s
deepening	frown	and	for	the	first	time	felt	apprehensive	about	the	sanity	of	the
plan.
“I	just	love	it.	It’s	brilliant.”	Kumbha	pranced	around	the	room.

“How	many	would	you	need?”
“Just	the	four	of	us,	Uncle,	you,	Kumbha,	me	and	Bhadra.	.	.	and	perhaps	a
dozen	good	swimmers.”
“It’s	just	too	risky.”	Maricha	said	shaking	his	head,	“And	how	far	we	can
trust	Bhadra.”
“We	have	to	take	the	chance.”
“But	 why	 do	 you	 want	 to?	 Do	 you	 want	 to	 prove	 something	 to	 us?	 We
know	you	are	brave,	but	I	would	prefer	a	living	coward	than	a	brave	dead	fool
as	the	Asura	king.”
“He’s	 trying	 to	 prove	 that	 he	 is	 every	 bit	 a	 warrior.	 When	 we	 won	 the
kingdom,	I	 never	thought	life	 would	 be	 so	 dull.	 I	 too	 am	 longing	 for	 action.
Let’s	not	waste	time.	Tomorrow	is	a	good	day.”	Kumbha	was	itching	to	leave.
“Are	you	leaving?”
“Why,	 are	 you	 afraid	 that	 I’ll	 go	 and	 get	 drunk	 and	 tell	 everyone	 about
it?”
“Stop	it,	you	two.	Let	us	sleep	over	it	today.”
Maricha	 left	 before	 Kumbha	 and	 I	 felt	 a	 tinge	 of	 anxiety	 mixed	 with
frustration.	 Kumbha	 was	 my	 dearest	 friend,	 much	 more	 than	 a	 brother.	 Now
every	 time	 I	 spoke	 to	 him,	 I	 had	 to	 think	 if	 I	 was	 hurting	 his	 already	 fragile
ego.	“I’m	sorry,	brother.	.	.”	But	he	had	left	before	I	could	tell	him	anything.

19	PIRATE	TROUBLES
Ravana
Later	that	afternoon,	Rudraka	came	to	report	he	has	arrested	over	3,000
rebels	and	had	er	e	>
“How	many	were	killed?”	I	wanted	him	to	say,	“Just	a	few.”
“About	800	of	our	soldiers.”
“And	you	call	that	a	law	and	order	problem?	It’s	a	bloody	war	out	there.
Will	removing	Jambumali	solve	the	issue?”
“Maybe,	but	 I’m	no	politician	to	comment	on	it,	Your	Highness.”	It	was
amusing	 to	 see	 him	 struggle	 to	 say	 the	 last	 part.	 I	 was	 sure	 he	 considered
himself	 better	 qualified	 to	 be	 king	 of	 Lanka.	 And	 maybe	 he	 was	 right.
“Actually,	it	seems	you	did	not	understand	my	question	properly.	When	I	asked
how	many	were	killed,	I	did	not	want	the	count	of	only	our	soldiers.”
Silence.
“I	hear	that	more	than	10,000	have	died.”
“Maybe.”
I	 exploded.	 “What	 do	 you	 mean?	 You’re	 supposed	 to	 be	 the	 army	 chief
and	what	I	get	as	a	reply	is	a	pathetic	‘maybe’.	Who	ordered	you	to	massacre
women	and	children?	And	old	men	and	women?”
“Did	that	scum,	Bhadra,	feed	you	these	opinions?	Your	Highness.”
“Don’t	you	dare	talk	to	me	like	that!	I	choose	my	company.	What	I	want	to
know	is	who	gave	you	orders	to	butcher	civilians?”
Silence.
“Answer	me.”
He	stood	there	and	said,	“I	believe	it	was	authorized	by	the	Council.”
“Council?	What	Council?	This	is	no	Asura	panchayat	and	I	am	no	petty
sarpanch.	I’m	the	King	and	I	give	orders.	I	take	responsibility	for	any	fiasco.

Now	you	have	gone	and	wiped	out	a	couple	of	districts	with	your	sword,	and	it
is	 I	 who	 feel	 the	 anger	 of	 my	 subjects.	 Now	 answer	 me,	 who	 ordered	 this
genocide?”
“If	you	want	me	to	resign,	Your	Highness,	I	shall.”	A	small	smile	twitched
at	the	corners	of	his	mouth.
That	threw	me	off.	I	didn’t	want	him	to	resign.	He	was	doing	a	fine	job.
But	his	ruthlessness	was	worrying	me.	I	just	wanted	him	to	go	a	bit	easy	and
curb	 the	 rebellion	 in	 a	 civilized	 fashion.	 I	 could	 have	 ordered	 his	 immediate
arrest	and	risked	a	rebellion	among	the	soldiers.	I	closed	my	eyes	in	an	effort
to	calm	down.	“See	here	Rudraka,	it	hurts	me	to	think	I’m	responsible	for	the
murder	 of	 innocent	 people.	 It’s	 not	 that	 I’m	 afraid	 of	 battle.	 But	 this	 is	 just
monstrous.	Do	we	need	to	go	on	like	this?”
He	wore	an	amused	look	on	his	face.	I	was	losing	this	battle	too.	I	tried	to
put	on	a	brave	face,	but	I	was	sure	he	saw	through	it.
“Your	Highness,	I	was	made	to	believe	that	you	had	given	written	orders
to	 Prime	 Minister	 Prahastha,	 to	 do	 everything	 to	 curb	 the	 rebellion.	 Do	 you
think	I	enjoy	killing	babies?”
I	looked	out	the	window	and	saw	Varuna’s	fleet	blobbing	up	and	down	in
the	sea.	The	sails	were	drawn	and	the	sea	breeze	occasionally	carried	odd	notes
of	 merriment	 to	 the	 palace.	 I	 closed	 my	 eyes.	 I	 was	 too	 tired	 to	 think	 about
anything.	 I	 was	 beginning	 to	 think	 this	 confrontation	 with	 Rudraka	 was	 quite
unnecessary.	 Had	 I	 exposed	 myself?	 My	 doubts,	 my	 indecisiveness,	 my
weakness?	What	was	I	afraid	of?	That	my	men	thought	me	a	coward	who	stole
a	kingo	stiodom	from	my	half-brother	and	then	used	my	soldiers	to	perpetuate
mass	 murder	 on	 my	 subjects?	 Perhaps	 everything	 would	 change	 tomorrow.	 I
dismissed	 Rudraka	 with	 a	 wave	 of	 my	 hand.	 The	 same	 arrogant	 flick	 of	 the
hand	 that	 my	 brother	 Kubera	 used	 when	 he	 sat	 on	 the	 same	 throne.	 ‘Ravana,
you	 are	a	fast	learner.’	 I	 knew	 I	was	getting	arrogant	but	 it	was	an	enjoyable
sensation.
Bhadra	updated	me	on	the	happenings	in	the	city	every	four	hours.	I	took
a	stroll	in	the	palace	gardens	and	saw	Mandodari	under	a	large	Banyan	tree.	I
was	 rather	 embarrassed	 and	 she	 stared	 at	 me	 for	 a	 few	 seconds.	 I	 stammered
and	 coughed	 and	 cursed	 myself	 for	 taking	 this	 path.	 I	 was	 thankful	 when	 she
did	not	start	a	conversation	with	me	and	I	quickly	walked	past.	I	saw	my	sister
smiling	at	me	but	ignored	the	jibe	in	the	smile	and	continued	walking.
I	 was	 relieved	 that	 the	 situation	 in	 the	 city	 had	 eased	 somewhat	 by	 the
evening	 and	 sat	 down	 to	 dinner	 with	 my	 mother	 and	 sister.	 Bhadra,	 who	 had

been	trying	to	make	himself	indispensable,	ran	to	and	from	the	royal	kitchen,
shouting	orders.
My	mother	spoke	first.	“You	may	leave	us	alone.	What	is	this	evil	looking
fellow’s	name,	Ravana?”
“Bhadra,	 wait	 outside.”	 I	 said,	 ignoring	 the	 sharpness	 in	 my	 mother ’s
voice.	 Bhadra	 left	 reluctantly	 but	 I	 was	 sure	 he	 would	 have	 his	 ear	 to	 the
keyhole.
“I	hear	you	blamed	Prahastha	for	all	the	excesses.”	I	was	rather	shocked
when	she	said	this	without	lifting	her	head	from	her	plate.
“No,	it’s	just.	.	.”
“Ravana,	you	are	still	young.	These	people	are	experienced	in	governing.
You	abide	by	their	advice.	Let	it	not	go	to	your	head	that	just	because	you
have	become	king	of	a	puny	island,	that	you	are	the	lone	saviour	of	the	Asuras.
You	 have	 a	 lot	 to	 learn	 and	 be	 thankful	 that	 you	 have	 able	 advisors	 around
you.”
“Mother,	 you	are	treating	me	like	 a	 child!	I	 don’t	 want	any	advice	from
idiots	 who	 have	 managed	 to	 lose	 their	 own	 kingdoms,	 honour,	 wealth	 and
everything	 they	 inherited,	 to	 the	 Devas.	 Whatever	 experience	 they	 had	 by
ruling	handkerchief-sized	kingdoms	and	living	in	perpetual	fear	of	Deva	raids,
has	 neither	 served	 the	 Asuras	 nor	 these	 bunch	 of	 pompous	 know-it-all
buffoons,	well.	You	know	that	better	than	me.”
“Why	are	you	speaking	to	me	like	this?”
“Now,	 don’t	 start	 narrating	 your	 tale	 of	 suffering.	 I	 know	 it	 by	 heart.
Mother,	 I	 love	 you	 and	 respect	 you,	 but	 it	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 I	 will	 always
remain	your	toddler.	Leave	the	ruling	to	me.”
My	 sister	 was	 shocked	 by	 this	 outburst.	 She	 stopped	 eating	 and	 sat
looking	at	me,	her	eyes	filled	with	tears.	My	mother	stood	up.	“Enough!	There
is	no	point	in	talking.	Power	has	gone	to	his	head.”
Anger	 got	 the	 better	 of	 me.	 I	 pulled	 the	 tablecloth	 off	 the	 table	 in	 one
quick	 movement.	 Vessels,	 plates	 and	 everything	 on	 the	 table	 tumbled	 to	 the
floor.	Servants	rushed	in	from	all	sides	to	clean	up	the	food	splattered	around.
Mother	stormed	out	of	the	room,	dragging	my	reluctant	sister	with	her.	And	I
walked	 listlessly	 to	 my	 room,	 anger	 slowly	 oozing	 out	 of	 me.	 I	 wiped	 my
hands	on	the	silk	curtains,	ignoring	the	stains	I	was	making	and	then	threw	off
my	footwear	and	lay	sprawled	on	the	huge	bed.	What	wrong	had	I	done	to	these
people?	I	had	just	begun	to	live	my	dream	and	it	had	already	gone	sour.	Why
did	 everyone	 find	 me	 overbearing,	 arrogant	 and	 tyrannical?	 A	 servant	 came

with	a	lamp	but	I	waved	him	away.	I	found	the	darkness	cozy	and	comfortable.
Perhaps	Prahastha	might	have	had	a	theory	to	explain	my	new-found	fondness
for	darkness	–	perhaps	the	reflection	of	a	dark	soul?
I	had	to	put	an	end	to	this	nonsense	this	had	a	today.	I	cannot	live	like	this
forever–with	 my	 ministers	 talking	 behind	 my	 back;	 my	 subjects	 cowering	 in
fear;	 the	 nagging	 of	 my	 mother	 and	 the	 irritating	 self-righteousness	 of
Prahastha.	What	I	needed	was	action.	Ravana	was	no	coward	and	I	jumped	from
my	bed	and	shouted	for	Bhadra.	He	appeared	surprisingly	quickly.	Had	he	been
waiting	outside?	He	made	me	an	elaborate	bow	and	I	felt	he	was	mocking	me,
but	I	chose	to	ignore	it.	Maybe	he	was	just	showing	his	sycophancy.	We	Asuras
–	always	ready	to	bow	low.	But	then,	how	I	would	have	felt	had	he	not	bowed?
Would	I	not	have	taken	it	as	a	mark	of	disrespect?
“Bhadra.	 .	 .	 How	 many	 warriors	 you	 can	 arrange?	 I	 mean,	 within	 the
hour?”
“You	want	good	swimmers,	Your	Majesty?”
“How	do	you	know	I	want	swimmers?”
“You	 want	 soldiers	 who	 are	 expert	 in	 martial	 arts,	 who	 can	 swim	 in	 a
rough	sea,	and	storm	a	fleet	of	ships.	I	think	I	know	the	people	and	can	arrange
about	twenty	of	them,	Your	Majesty.”
I	 was	 silent	 for	 a	 moment.	 It	 was	 eerie	 the	 way	 he	 read	 my	 mind.	 What
sort	 of	 a	 creature	 was	 he?	 A	 wizard?	 Even	 I	 was	 not	 sure	 that	 was	 what	 I
wanted.	The	plan	was	sheer	madness.	Taking	on	a	fleet	of	ships	with	a	handful
of	soldiers	was	the	height	of	foolishness.	And	I	was	no	soldier	of	fortune	now.
A	king	could	not	afford	to	be	so	reckless.	I	imagined	Prahastha’s	face	when	he
learnt	that	the	King	had	departed	at	dead	of	the	night	with	a	motley	crew	of	half
trained	 soldiers,	 to	 take	 on	 the	 most	 fearsome	 pirate	 in	 the	 world.	 I	 almost
smiled	at	the	thought.	Just	to	spite	Prahastha,	the	suicidal	mission	was	worth	it.
Bhadra	 made	 another	 elaborate	 bow	 and	 left	 the	 room	 silently.	 I	 looked
out	at	the	pirate	fleet.	The	merriment	had	died	down	and	the	lights	in	the	ships
were	turned	off.	I	hoped	that	the	pirates	were	drunk	and	fast	asleep.	I	was	not
sure	which	ship	housed	the	 pirate-King,	Varuna.	 The	biggest	factor	would	be
surprise.	 My	 kingship	 depended	 on	 it.	 I	 knew	 it	 was	 a	 huge	 risk	 and	 if	 I	 was
captured	 by	 the	 pirates,	 the	 doors	 of	 Lanka	 would	 be	 left	 wide	 open	 to	 their
marauding	 hordes.	 I	 was	 also	 afraid.	 It	 was	 a	 numbing,	 paralyzing	 fear.	 The
stories	of	torture	meted	out	by	the	pirate	king	to	hapless	souls	who	fell	into	his
hands,	were	legend.	His	cold	heartedness	raised	him	to	the	league	of	the	Deva
Gods.	 I	 tried	 to	 rationalize	 the	 fear	 I	 felt	 as	 concern	 for	 my	 countrymen	 and

relatives.
Then	it	came,	that	ugly	inner	voice,	‘You	could	even	fool	yourself,	Ravana.
So	noble,	so	brave!	The	great	Emperor	of	a	tiny	village,	so	concerned	about	the
fate	of	his	subjects.	How	many	kings	are	as	noble	hearted	as	you?’	When	would
I	ever	silence	that	voice?	I	know…I	am	more	afraid	about	my	own	safety.	My
vivid	imagination	painted	pictures	of	the	torture	I	might	endure.	I	am	afraid	of
Varuna.	Would	I	be	able	to	withstand	the	pain?	More	than	that,	would	I	be	able
take	 the	 shame	 of	 being	 dragged	 naked	 through	 the	 muddy	 lanes	 of	 Lanka?
Why	couldn’t	I	be	satisfied	with	a	simple	peasant’s	life?
In	the	stealth	of	the	night,	we	would	launch	the	canoes	and	paddle	slowly
towards	the	ships.	The	decks	were	at	least	twenty	feet	off	the	water.	How	would
we	 climb	 up	 to	 them	 without	 any	 sound?	 Which	 ship	 should	 we	 attack	 first?
The	 key	 would	 be	 to	 capture	 or	 kill	 Varuna.	 There	 were	 six	 ships	 at	 anchor.
The	 pirate-king’s	 ship	 –	 a	 floating	 palace	 –	 was	 visible	 from	 a	 distance.	 But
Varuna,	the	small-time	fisherman,	did	not	become	Varuna,	the	pirate-king,	by
being	 predictable.	There	was	every	possibility	that	he	would	be	in	one	of	the
smaller	 ships,	 anticipating	 such	 a	 move	 from	 the	 Asura	 army.	 Without
intelligence	 about	 the	 enemy	 position,	 it	 was	 a	 fool’s	 war	 we	 were	 going	 to
wage.	Prahastha	would	have	a	heart	attack	when	he	heard	we	had	gone	on	such
a	reckless	mission	without	sufficienhoua	wout	information	and	military	backup.	Should	I	abandon	the	mission?	My	legs	trembled	and	I	was	horrified	to	see
my	hands	shaking.
I	was	startled	to	hear	a	cough	behind	me	and	turned	to	see	the	repulsive
face	 of	 Bhadra.	 This	 guy	 could	 assassinate	 me	 without	 my	 being	 aware	 of	 it.
Had	he	got	the	paws	of	a	cat?
“Your	 Highness,	 your	 people	 are	 at	 your	 service.”	 Translation,	 twenty
people,	including	this	creature,	were	willing	to	die	at	my	orders.	But	why	did	I
not	feel	like	I	did	when	I	led	an	army	into	battle?	My	first	war	was	electrifying.
I	could	compare	it	to	what	I	felt	when	I	took	my	first	girl	into	the	bushes	when	I
was	fourteen.	But	I	could	sense	the	excitement	building	in	the	men.	In	the	hot,
humid	air,	the	smell	of	their	sweat	mingled	with	the	smell	of	Jasmine	flowers
from	the	garden.	The	moon	had	hidden	behind	the	clouds.	I	could	smell	blood
on	my	hands,	and	fear.	I	prayed	to	some	unknown	god	in	whom	I	did	not	even
believe,	that	these	men,	who	also	appeared	so	brave,	should	not	smell	my	fear.
Silently	 I	 walked	 out	 of	 the	 room	 trying	 to	 hold	 my	 head	 high	 and	 my
shoulders	straight.	I	tried	to	walk	confidently	and	appear	like	the	warriors	of
old.	 Had	 they	 been	 as	 afraid	 as	 I?	 Perhaps,	 if	 I	 came	 out	 of	 this	 alive,	 after

thousands	of	years,	there	would	be	stories	told	about	me	too.	The	voice	inside
me	started	its	tirade.	‘Ah,	Ravana,	you	are	just	a	tiny	speck	in	the	universe	and
it	does	not	matter	a	bit	if	you	die	or	win	today.	Your	death	is	less	valuable	than
a	worm’s	death.	A	worm	becomes	food	for	a	bird	or	manure	for	the	soil.	If	you
die,	your	body	will	be	burned,	adding	only	empty	fumes	to	the	atmosphere.	As
far	as	nature	is	concerned,	your	struggles	and	trials,	your	triumphs,	your	very
birth	 and	 death,	 are	 all	 irrelevant	 incidents.	 They	 are	 small	 stones	 crushed
under	 the	 wheels	 of	 time.	 If	 you	 live,	 you	 will	 just	 be	 one	 day	 closer	 to	 the
inevitable	end.	If	you	die,	then	the	universe	will	still	remain	the	same.	Ravana,
what	a	fool	are	you.	.	.’
The	waves	crashing	onto	the	rocks	woke	me	up	from	the	numbing	lullaby
of	the	depressing	inner	voice.	Bhadra	and	another	man	of	slight	build,	pushed
three	canoes	into	the	sea.	One	by	one,	the	men	waded	through	waist-deep	water
and	got	into	the	canoes.	I	stood	transfixed,	staring	at	the	heaving	ocean	and	the
sure	death	which	awaited	us.	Varuna’s	ships	were	anchored	close	to	the	shore,
yet	now	they	seemed	to	touch	the	edge	of	the	horizon.	I	stepped	into	the	waves
and	 was	 immediately	 submerged.	 The	 waves	 rolled	 me	 back	 to	 the	 shore.
Sputtering	 and	 swearing,	 I	 stood	 up	 and	 waded	 towards	 the	 canoes	 again.	 I
chose	to	ignore	the	grin	on	my	soldiers	black	faces	and	jumped	into	the	first
canoe.	Immediately	the	crew	started	rowing	the	canoe	towards	the	ships,	with
the	other	two	canoes	following.	Thunder	sounded	in	the	distance.	A	sword	of
lightning	 silhouetted	 the	 pirate-King’s	 ship	 against	 the	 dark	 horizon.	 The	 sea
became	rough.	The	other	two	canoes	fell	behind,	but	rowed	furiously.	Slowly,
fighting	the	rolling	swells,	we	reached	within	a	few	yards	of	the	ships.	Another
streak	of	lightning	illuminated	the	sky	and	the	rolling	waters.
Removing	 all	 my	 clothes	 except	 for	 my	 loin	 cloth,	 and	 clutching	 my
sword	between	my	teeth,	I	jumped	into	the	freezing	water	and	started	paddling
towards	 the	 ships.	 I	 could	 hear	 the	 soft	 paddling	 from	 the	 soldiers	 who
followed	 me.	 The	 ships	 heaved	 in	 the	 rolling	 waters	 and	 I	 found	 it	 quite
impossible	to	stay	near	them.	I	swam	towards	the	ship	I	thought	Varuna	would
be	 in.	 As	 if	 on	 cue,	 two	 soldiers	 climbed	 the	 ship’s	 vertical	 side	 towards	 the
deck.	It	was	amazing	to	watch	them	as	they	used	special	claws	to	dig	into	the
wooden	boards	to	get	a	grip.	They	climbed	up	fast,	almost	like	lizards.	But	it
seemed	 an	 eternity	 before	 two	 ropes	 came	 snaking	 down.	 I	 jumped	 and
grabbed	one	of	the	ropes	and	started	climbing.

st,	 ize="-1">Bhadra	 followed	 on	 the	 other	 rope.

Quickly,	the	others	followed.	I	reached	the	deck	first	and
the	sight	I	saw	chilled	my	heart.	The	two	brave	men	who
had	 climbed	 up	 first,	 lay	 there	 slain	 –	 their	 bodies
sprawled	on	the	deck.
“Get	out!	It’s	a	trap!”	 I	 shouted.	 Then	 it	 started	 raining,	 a	 sudden	 storm
raged	and	the	ship	swayed	precariously.	Some	of	my	soldiers	fell	into	the	sea,
but	others	joined	me	on	deck.	There	was	silence,	other	than	the	deafening	noise
of	the	howling	wind.	We	stood	there	with	our	swords	drawn.	It	was	ridiculous,
standing	there	almost	naked	and	completely	drenched,	waiting	to	be	killed.	The
rain	washed	away	the	puddles	of	blood.	And	it	washed	away	the	false	courage	I
had	built	up.	‘Oh	God!	What	had	I	done?’
Then	the	darkness	resonated	with	devilish	laughter.	In	a	flash	of	lightning,
I	 saw	 we	 were	 surrounded	 by	 heavily	 armed	 pirates.	 We	 were	 seriously
outnumbered	and	there	was	no	chance	of	escape.	With	a	mighty	effort	of	will
power,	I	jumped	and	thrust	my	sword	into	the	guts	of	a	fearsome	pirate.	This
electrified	my	troops	and	a	battle	ensued	on	the	swaying	decks.	I	was	reckless
and	astonishingly	my	fear	deserted	me.	I	fought	from	my	heart	and	lost	count
of	 how	 many	 I	 butchered.	 The	 wooden	 deck	 was	 slippery	 with	 blood	 and	 the
dangling	 ropes	 of	 the	 sails	 added	 to	 the	 danger.	 I	 was	 wounded	 thrice	 and
bleeding	profusely,	but	that	was	the	least	of	my	worries.	I	slowly	realized	that
we	could	take	over	the	ship.	To	our	dismay,	we	found	that	the	other	ships	had
closed	 in.	 Pirates	 were	 jumping	 into	 the	 raging	 sea	 and	 swimming	 like	 mad
men	towards	our	ship.	If	they	reached	us,	total	annihilation	would	be	inevitable.
Where	was	that	bastard	Varuna?	If	only	I	could	lay	my	hands	on	him!	The
first	pirates	from	the	other	ships	started	climbing	onto	our	deck.	I	kicked	one
in	 the	 face	 and	 saw	 him	 fall	 into	 the	 raging	 sea.	 Perhaps	 Varuna	 was	 in	 the
lower	chamber.	I	kicked	open	the	door	leading	to	the	stairs	and	jumped	down
to	 the	 lower	 chamber.	 The	 ornate	 door	 were	 closed	 and	 a	 faint	 light	 came
through	 the	 cracks.	 Ghastly	 shadows	 played	 on	 the	 curved	 walls	 of	 the	 ship.
The	sounds	of	the	battle	on	the	decks	reached	me	faintly.	Was	Varuna	inside?
I	kicked	open	the	door	and	swung	my	sword	in	a	sweep.	The	room	was
empty.	I	drove	my	sword	into	the	flying	silk	curtains.	Like	a	sniffer	dog,	I	fell
to	the	floor	to	see	whether	the	coward	was	hiding	under	the	bed.	Then	a	cold,
steel	blade	touched	the	nape	of	my	neck.
“Well,	 the	 Emperor	 of	 the	 Asuras	 is	 paying	 a	 royal	 visit	 to	 this	 poor
fisherman’s	chamber.	I	am	grateful,	Your	Majesty.”

I	 tried	 looking	 up	 to	 see	 the	 face	 of	 the	 hated	 pirate-king,	 but	 with	 his
wooden	 shoes,	he	 kicked	my	face.	Blood	oozed	from	my	nose	and	formed	a
pool	on	the	floor.	My	fear	returned.	Trapped!	This	was	the	end.
“You	surprise	me,	Your	Majesty.	You	visit	your	guest’s	chamber	in	your
loin	cloth?	Is	it	an	Asura	custom	from	the	mainland	or	are	you	making	a	new
fashion	statement	for	your	subjects	to	emulate?”
With	an	agility	which	surprised	Varuna	and	me,	I	kicked	at	his	ankles	and
in	that	second	of	surprise,	I	rolled	 onto	my	feet.	 I	was	burning	with	anger.	If
only	 I	 could	 kill	 him	 or	 better	 yet,	 capture	 him,	 I	 would	 not	 only	 retain	 a
kingdom	but	also	my	shattered	pride.	I	tried	to	hit	him	a	heavy	blow	with	my
sword,	but	he	easily	blocked	it.	Fuelled	by	my	frustration	and	pent-up	anger,	I
started	 fighting.	 But	 Varuna,	 who	 was	 almost	 forty	 years	 old,	 parlayed	 my
strokes	 and	 thrusts	 with	 an	 ease	 bordering	 on	 boredom.	 His	 swordsmanship
was	 beyond	 compare	 and	 he	 resembled	 Mahabali	 at	 his	 best.	 My	 twentysomething	youth	and	energy	was	no	match	for	noes	the	quiet	 confidence	and
poise	of	the	veteran.
“Oh	 good,	 good.	 .	 .but	 you	 need	 more	 practice.	 .	 .no,	 not	 that	 way,	 try
swinging	 from	 the	 left	 –	 there	 there,	 that	 was	 better	 –	 but	 you	 need	 to	 exert
more	 power.	 .	 .”	 His	 monotone	 was	 irritating	 and	 made	 me	 feel	 like	 a	 child
being	trained	in	the	martial	arts.	He	had	drawn	blood	many	times	and	I	had	not
been	able	to	touch	him	even	once.	My	wounds	started	bleeding	again	and	I	felt
dizzy.	All	was	lost.	I	was	desperate.
“Varuna,	you	pirate,	hold	on	or	lose	your	blasted	head!”
I	 turned	 and	 saw	 to	 my	 surprise,	 two	 archers	 framed	 in	 the	 doorway.	 It
took	 me	 a	 few	 seconds	 to	 recognize	 my	 uncle	 Maricha,	 and	 my	 brother
Kumbakarna.	They	pointed	their	arrows	at	Varuna	and	for	the	first	time	I	saw
him	lose	his	calm.	Before	I	could	react,	he	tried	to	jump	into	the	sea	through
the	open	window.	I	grabbed	his	legs	and	he	fell	with	his	face	flat	on	the	floor.
Before	 Varuna	 could	 shake	 me	 off,	 Kumbha	 was	 on	 him	 and	 together	 we
pinned	 him	 down	 and	 tied	 his	 hands	 behind	 his	 back	 with	 the	 silk	 curtains
Maricha	had	torn	down	and	handed	to	us.
“How	the	hell	did	you	people	arrive	in	the	nick	of	time?”	I	could	not	stop
wondering	at	this	fairy	tale	arrival	of	the	redeeming	heroes.
Maricha	 was	 out	 of	 breath	 but	 that	 did	 not	 stop	 his	 tale.	 “When	 you
discussed	the	plans	with	us	this	morning,	I	kept	thinking	about	it.	The	more	I
thought,	 the	 more	 reckless	 and	 foolish	 it	 appeared	 to	 me.	 I	 came	 to	 your
chambers	 to	 warn	 you	 not	 to	 undertake	 this	 idiotic	 mission.	 But	 you	 were

missing.	One	did	not	need	to	be	a	genius	like	Prahastha	to	guess	where	you	had
gone.	Certainly	not	for	a	late	night	stroll.	I	woke	this	oaf,	then	ran	like	a	mad
dog	 and	 blew	 the	 war	 bugle.	 I	 could	 assemble	 only	 a	 few	 hundred	 soldiers.
Half	of	them	were	dead	drunk.	These	Asuras…	Then	we	paddled	like	crazy	to
watch	the	entertaining	circus	you	had	set	up	on	the	high	seas.”
“Did	we	lose	any	men?”
“Do	 you	 think	 we	 were	 warmly	 welcomed	 with	 betel	 leaves	 and	 sweets
into	Varuna’s	ship?	We	lost	a	few	dozens	and	half	of	them	died	not	because	of
battle	 wounds	 but	 drowning	 in	 these	 turbulent	 waters.	 I	 heard	 you	 also	 lost
some	men.”
“The	 count	 was	 six	 when	 I	 started	 my	 interesting	 chat	 with	 the	 great
pirate-	King.”
“I’m	sorry,	but	I	think	your	pet	Bhadra	drowned.	Vaystha,	the	head	soldier
saw	him	fall	over	and	no	one	has	seen	him	since.	In	these	rough	seas	I	think	he
would	have	reached	China	by	now.”
“Brother,	what	shall	we	do	with	this	pirate?”
“Throw	him	with	his	legs	and	arms	tied,	into	the	sea	–	a	fitting	end	for	the
king	of	the	seas.”	Maricha	said	without	a	moment’s	hesitation.
“That	would	serve	him	right.	No,	hold	on.	Let’s	take	him	to	Lanka.	Let’s
drag	him	through	the	streets	in	his	loin	cloth.’	I	was	getting	enthusiastic.	“Let
the	 people	 of	 my	 kingdom	 see	 the	 man	 who	 was	 responsible	 for	 their
miseries.”
“And	let	them	also	see	King	Ravana,	who	freed	them	from	their	misery.
Ravana,	 the	 slayer	 of	 the	 pirates	 and	 the	 King	 of	 the	 seven	 seas,”	 Kumbha
added	with	a	smile.
Maricha	stared	at	both	of	us.	Then	as	an	afterthought	he	added.	“It	would
be	better	if	you	gifted	the	King	of	pirates	to	the	mother	sea.”
I	 ignored	 this	 piece	 of	 advice.	 But,	 if	 I	 could	 rewrite	 my	 life,	 I	 would
perhaps	 start	 from	 that	 moment	 and	 ask	 Maricha	 and	 Kumbha	 to	 lend	 me	 a
helping	hand	to	lift	Varuna	and	fling	him	overboard.

20	Weddi	noesp>
Ravana
I	had	to	enter	my	royal	chamber	but	I	did	not	dare	to.	She	would	be	there,
waiting	 for	 me.	 I	 was	 married	 today.	 Of	 all	 the	 people,	 I	 married	 that	 frosty
Mandodari.	 I	 knew	 it	 was	 inevitable	 but	 I	 wanted	 to	 postpone	 it	 as	 long	 as
possible.	 But	 when	 the	 royal	 procession	 entered	 the	 streets	 of	 Trikota,	 I	 was
beyond	 myself.	 Victory	 can	 make	 one	 foolish.	 And	 this	 week	 many	 things
happened	so	swiftly	that	I	was	barely	able	to	think.
The	word	had	gone	ahead	of	us	that	the	mighty	King	of	Lanka	had	caught
the	pirate-King	Varuna.	The	pirates	were	stripped	to	their	loin	cloths,	smeared
with	 mud	 and	 dirt,	 spat	 upon,	 brutally	 beaten	 up,	 and	 then	 made	 to	 walk	 in	 a
macabre	 procession	 behind	 their	 fallen	 King.	 Thousands	 lined	 the	 streets,
shouting	 triumphantly.	 I	 walked	 in	 front	 of	 the	 procession	 hoping	 I	 looked
sufficiently	heroic.	Once	in	a	while	I	raised	my	sword	to	the	cheering	crowd
and	 it	 seemed	 to	 electrify	 them.	 I	 was	 their	 hero-king	 who	 had	 saved	 Lanka
from	 the	 clutches	 of	 the	 dreaded	 pirate.	 My	 heart	 swelled	 with	 pride.	 I	 hit
Varuna	across	his	face,	drawing	blood	from	his	nose.	Ah,	that	felt	good.	I	hit
him	 again	 and	 raised	 my	 sword.	 The	 crowd	 started	 shouting,	 “Long	 live
Ravana,	long	live	our	King”.	Some	poor	soul	came	and	fell	at	my	feet.	One	of
my	 soldiers	 kicked	 him	 and	 the	 crowd	 laughed.	 Someone	 near	 me	 booed.	 I
stared	into	the	crowd	and	the	entire	section	cowered.	I	could	smell	their	fear.
The	same	people	who	wanted	a	revolution	to	throw	me	out	were	now	afraid	of
me.	Success	can	be	so	sweet.	People	bowed	down	to	me.
I	 looked	 back	 and	 suddenly	 my	 soldiers	 who	 had	 been	 shouting	 and
laughing,	stopped.	I	stared	at	them	and	they	too	lowered	their	heads.	I	looked	at
Kumbha	and	he	smiled	at	me.	I	did	not	return	the	smile	but	caught	Maricha’s
eye.	He	shook	his	head	sadly.	‘Why	does	this	fellow	not	bow	to	me?’	I	began	to

simmer.	Varuna,	with	his	blood-stained	face,	caught	my	eye	and	gave	a	devilish
laugh.	I	dreaded	his	laugh,	but	more	than	that,	I	dreaded	myself.	‘What	sort	of	a
demon	 was	 I	 becoming?	 Why	 was	 I	 treating	 my	 people	 like	 this?	 Why	 was	 I
getting	 angry	 even	 at	 Maricha,	 when	 he	 did	 not	 show	 respect?’	 Suddenly,	 I
wanted	to	run	and	hug	him	and	say	I	was	sorry.	But	something	held	me	back.	I
increased	my	pace	and	entered	the	palace	gate.
Standing	 at	 the	 far	 end	 of	 the	 long	 corridor,	 waiting	 for	 me,	 was
Prahastha.	 There	 was	 a	 frown	 on	 his	 face	 and	 a	 faint	 air	 of	 disapproval.	 I
wanted	 to	 dance	 round	 Prahastha.	 The	 idiot	 had	 kept	 advising	 me	 to	 be
cautious.	Fat	good	caution	had	done	him	and	his	bunch	of	Asura	jokers.	As	I
reached	him,	I	slowed	and	looked	into	his	eyes.	He	was	staring	at	me.	A	staring
contest.	What	did	he	want	now?	If	he	started	to	lecture	me	about	statesmanship
and	diplomacy,	I	would	catch	hold	of	him	by	the	scruff	of	his	neck	and	rub	his
nose	 on	 the	 floor.	 Thankfully,	 he	 kept	 quiet.	 Perhaps	 he	 practised	 what	 he
preached	–	prudence.
“Call	the	court,	I	would	like	to	speak	to	all	my	ministers.”	I	ordered	him
as	he	stood	there	with	his	frowning	stare.
I	was	busy	hugging	my	sister,	and	Kumbha,	when	Prahastha	spoke	again.
“Shall	I	send	a	message	for	withdrawal	of	the	army	from	the	southern	sector	of
the	city?”
“Do	what	you	think	is	right.	You	are	the	Prime	Minister.”	I	dismissed	him
with	 a	 wave	 of	 the	 hand	 and	 he	 made	 a	 slight	 bow	 and	 left.	 As	 I	 watched	 his
steady,	departing	strides,	my	eyes	looked	into	those	of	the	chained	pirate-king.
A	smile	played	about	his	mouth.	Had	the	wily	fox	sensed	the	political	tension?
It	 did	 not	 matter	 as	 long	 as	 he	 was	 chained	 like	 a	 mad	 dog.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 was
concerned,	he	could	keep	his	amused	smile	until	some	lowly	soldier	from	my
army	 saw	 it	 and	 decide	 itas	 concerd	 to	 wipe	 it	 off	 his	 face	 with	 a	 good	 hard
knock.	I	could	hear	the	festivities	outside	the	palace.	Just	another	reason	for	the
Asuras	to	get	drunk.	Let	them	celebrate.	My	heart	went	out	to	them.	Finally,	I
had	lived	up	to	the	expectations	of	my	people.	I	did	not	want	to	remind	myself
that	 sharks	 would	 have	 been	 eating	 the	 last	 of	 me	 had	 Maricha	 not	 turned	 up
when	he	did.	.	.	So	much	for	my	brand	of	heroism.
“My	hero,	have	you	finished	your	day’s	quota	of	heroism?”	My	mother
was	smiling	at	me	and	I	went	and	hugged	her.
“You	 fool!	 What	 if	 you	 had	 got	 killed?”	 I	 could	 feel	 her	 tears	 dripping
onto	my	bare	shoulders.	I	hugged	her	tighter.	She	held	me	at	arm’s	length	and
peered	into	my	face.	“You	look	like	your	father,	Ravana.”

I	 went	 stiff.	 He	 was	 the	 last	 person	 I	 wanted	 to	 look	 like.	 I	 would	 have
preferred	to	look	like	a	cat	run	over	by	a	chariot.	I	think	she	sensed	that	too.
There	was	a	thick	silence.	I	took	a	few	steps	forward	and	stopped	dead.	There
was	 Mandodari,	 leaning	 against	 a	 pillar	 and	 looking	 at	 me	 with	 that	 same
toneless,	featureless,	emotionless,	intense	look.	I	did	not	know	what	to	say.	‘Go,
go	and	kiss	her	on	her	lips.	That	is	what	heroes	are	supposed	to	do	after	their
bouts	of	heroism.	Kiss	the	heroine	and	if	a	horse	is	handy,	lift	her	up	and	ride
into	the	sunset.’	Instead,	I	fumbled.
“What	 is	 this,	a	lover ’s	meet?	Silent	communication	with	the	eyes?”	my
sister,	 Soorpanakha’s	devilish	voice	 broke	the	spell.	I	turned	and	caught	hold
of	her	by	the	ear	and	she	howled.
“Any	more	nonsense	from	you	and	I	will	marry	you	off	to	the	first	Asura
drunkard	I	see	today,”	I	cried	out	in	mock	anger.	I	was	relieved	to	have	escaped
the	ordeal	of	striking	up	a	conversation	with	Mandodari.	I	sneaked	a	glance	to
see	if	she	was	blushing	or	feeling	shy.	Nothing	of	the	sort.	Just	that	stare.	That
piercing	 stare	 which	went	through	my	soul.	Could	she	read	my	dark	secrets?
‘Oh	 God,	 if	 I	 married	 this	 creature,	 she	 would	 stare	 and	 stare	 and	 one	 day	 I
would	go	up	in	smoke.’
Suddenly	I	felt	my	privacy	violated.	I	had	forgotten	about	the	pirate-	King.
He	was	standing	there	with	that	arrogant	smile	playing	on	his	lips,	drinking	in
the	 scene	 unfolding	 before	 him.	 Chained	 and	 almost	 naked,	 he	 did	 not	 seem
bothered	 about	 his	 plight.	 Why	 hadn’t	 a	 minister	 or	 officious	 bureaucrat,
dragged	this	prisoner	away	to	his	dark	cell?	All	the	useless	Asura	fools	were
enjoying	 their	 King’s	 victory	 and	 had	 forgotten	 about	 their	 king	 and	 his
captive.	 I	 shouted	 at	 the	 top	 of	 my	 voice.	 It	 was	 another	 five	 minutes	 before
someone	appeared	and	made	an	elaborate	bow.	I	wanted	to	kick	his	black	arse
but	it	would	have	been	unfair	to	punish	this	efficient	Asura	for	his	promptness.
I	 asked	 him	 to	 drag	 the	 pirate-King	 to	 one	 of	 the	 dark,	 underground	 cells
where	Kubera	used	to	keep	his	detractors.
The	 deferential	 way	 in	 which	 my	 guard	 was	 treating	 the	 pirate-King
almost	made	me	gag.	Except	for	his	chains,	Varuna	looked	as	if	he	was	on	a
state	 visit.	 My	 biggest	 challenge	 would	 be	 to	 discipline	 these	 Asura	 clowns.
They	behaved	like	children.	Images	of	the	twenty	odd	soldiers	who	had	risked
their	 lives	 a	 few	 hours	 before,	 believing	 in	 me	 totally,	 flashed	 through	 my
mind.	 How	 many	 were	 dead?	 How	 many	 widows	 had	 I	 created?	 How	 many
children	in	those	huts	sprinkled	beyond	the	city	walls	would	fall	asleep	crying
for	their	fathers,	for	many	days	to	come?	Tomorrow	I	would	visit	the	huts	of

my	 soldiers	 who	 had	 gone	 missing	 or	 been	 killed.	 I	 would	 ensure	 their
children	 would	 not	 starve;	 nor	 the	 widows	 dragged	 into	 the	 vicious	 net	 of
prostitution.	I	owed	them	that	much	for	trusting	me	and	sacrificing	their	lives.
‘What	a	great	man	I	was.	But	what	about	tt	wves.	How	would	I	ever	feel	happy
if	this	joker	inside	me	kept	throwing	such	ridiculous	thoughts	into	my	mind?	I
had	the	right	to	feel	noble	and	great,	at	least	once	in	a	while.
And	where	was	Bhadra?	The	guy	was	an	enigma.	Could	he	have	died	so
easily?	I	felt	responsible	for	the	death	of	my	beloved	servant.	The	sun	climbed
up	 and	 everything	 looked	 fresh	 and	 washed	 after	 the	 previous	 day’s	 shower.
Birds	 chirped	 in	 the	 trees	 and	 dragonflies	 buzzed	 around	 the	 flowers	 in	 the
overgrown	 garden.	 I	 looked	 out	 of	 the	 window	 and	 could	 see	 kites	 hovering
over	 the	 swaying	 coconut	 palms.	 Crows	 cawed	 and	 the	 distant	 sounds	 of
women	 washing	 clothes,	 kept	 rhythm	 with	 each	 other.	 All	 was	 well	 with	 the
world	 and	 it	 was	 one	 of	 those	 wonderful	 moments	 when	 all	 thoughts	 ceased
and	a	pleasant	emptiness	filled	my	mind.
“Pray.	Pray	for	your	soul	and	the	men	you	have	killed.	And	peace	shall	be
yours,	my	King.”
“Shut	 your	 mouth,	 you.	 .	 .don’t	 tell	 me	 what	 to	 do.	 .	 .”	 I	 did	 not	 know
Mandodari	 was	 standing	 near	 by,	 watching	 me	 with	 those	 intense	 eyes.	 I	 was
startled	to	hear	her	voice.	I	had	been	so	absorbed	with	nature.	Now	I	wanted	to
grab	her	throat	and	squeeze	the	life	out	of	her.	Had	I	asked	this	prude	for	her
advice?	How	dare	she	enter	my	world	and	talk	rubbish?	She	had	gone	pale	and
a	 sob	 quivered	 in	 her	 throat.	 I	 was	 embarrassed	 at	 my	 outburst	 and	 felt	 the
anger	drain	out	of	me.	I	had	never	been	in	such	a	situation	and	did	not	know
what	to	do.	Should	I	apologize?	But	she	had	deserved	it.	I	felt	my	anger	return.
“I’m	sorry.	.	.”	she	said.
“Alright,	 alright.	 .	 .”	 I	 wanted	 to	 add	 that	 she	 had	 had	 it	 coming	 but	 I
prudently	kept	quiet.
“Your	Highness,	the	court	has	assembled,”	the	guard	shouted	at	the	top	of
his	 voice.	 I	 was	 thankful	 for	 the	 break	 and	 walked	 past,	 my	 mind	 racing
through	the	probable	questions	Prahastha	and	others	would	raise	and	how	best
to	deal	with	them.
The	court	was	in	full	assembly	and	the	dozing	guard	at	the	door	snapped
to	attention	when	I	went	past	him.	It	bothered	me	a	little	that	I	had	to	cough	and
let	him	know	of	my	presence	before	he	showed	his	version	of	respect.	I	wanted
to	 kick	 the	 guard	 and	 drive	 some	 discipline	 into	 his	 wooden	 head.	 But	 then	 I
would	 have	 ended	 up	 kicking	 my	 entire	 army.	 Besides,	 I	 had	 more	 important

things	 to	 worry	 about	 than	 being	 a	 drill	 sergeant	 to	 my	 soldiers.	 Now	 the
priority	 was	 to	 emphasize	 my	 authority	 and	 not	 let	 the	 Council	 take	 over.	 I
knew	 Prahastha	 would	 be	 scheming	 behind	 me	 as	 he	 was	 livid	 at	 my
spectacular	 victory	 against	 the	 pirate-King	 Varuna.	 He	 might	 even	 thrust
forward	his	hare-brained	opinions	about	how	to	treat	the	pirate	and	quote	from
some	obscure	books	on	the	Asura	code	of	conduct.	I	decided	that	if	he	quoted
some	 ancient	 Asura	 sage,	 and	 said	 that	 I	 had	 to	 leave	 Varuna	 with	 full	 state
honours	 as	 a	 visiting	 King,	 I	 would	 ensure	 that	 the	 pirate-kings	 would	 be
demeaned	 to	 the	 maximum	 possible	 extent,	 dragged	 through	 the	 streets	 and
flogged	 in	 public,	 and	 finally	 left	 to	 an	 agonizing,	 slow	 and	 painful	 death	 in
public.	I	was	worried	and	unsure	how	the	rest	of	the	Council	would	respond.	I
had	to	get	rid	of	this	farce	of	a	Council.	Why	did	I	need	them	to	give	me	advice
on	how	I	should	conduct	myself?
As	I	entered	the	durbar,	I	looked	around.	The	ornate	chair	at	the	end	of
the	 room	 had	 a	 decorative	 umbrella	 over	 it.	 Pearls	 and	 diamonds	 of	 various
shapes	hung	from	its	frill.	There	was	a	huge	diamond	on	the	chair	back.	It	was
the	 royal	 throne	 of	 the	 king	 of	 Lanka.	 I	 felt	 a	 little	 perturbed	 that	 it	 had	 not
come	 naturally	 to	 me	 to	 think	 of	 it	 as	 my	 throne.	 Yes,	 it	 was	 thYesr	 back.	 Ie
same	 throne	 which	 had	 supported	 my	 half-brother ’s	 fat	 bottom.	 Where	 his
pompous	 Highness	 sat	 dispensing	 his	 version	 of	 justice.	 I	 stood	 transfixed.	 I
had	came	a	long	way,	a	very	long	way,	from	the	day	when	I	had	accompanied
my	 mother	 and	 siblings	 to	 beg	 before	 Kubera,	 who	 had	 been	 sitting	 on	 this
same	throne,	and	he	had	thrown	a	few	coins	at	our	feet	and	dismissed	us	like
beggars,	with	a	wave	of	his	hand.
I	climbed	the	steps	to	the	throne.
“Stop!”	 The	 shout	 echoed	 inside	 the	 large	 durbar	 hall.	 I	 turned	 back
hastily	 and	 my	 steps	 faltered.	 Then	 I	 saw	 Prahastha	 standing	 with	 his	 arms
crossed	 behind	 him.	 Blood	 shot	 into	 my	 veins.	 Instinctively	 I	 drew	 out	 my
sword.	The	ministers	who	had	been	sitting,	stood	up	in	their	seats.	‘Why	were
they	sitting	in	the	first	place?	Were	they	not	supposed	to	stand	up	when	I,	the
King,	entered	the	room?’	My	lips	trembled	and	I	was	sure	my	eyes	had	turned
blood	 red.	 I	 had	 never	 felt	 angrier	 in	 my	 life.	 Prahastha,	 my	 prime	 minister,
had	 stopped	 me	 from	 touching	 my	 own	 throne.	 Had	 I	 been	 blessed	 with
prophetic	 vision,	 I	 would	 have	 thanked	 him	 and	 walked	 out	 to	 the	 freedom
waiting	outside	the	palace.	I	should	have	gone	then,	leaving	the	governance	to
those	who	were	learned	like	Prahastha,	and	pursued	my	true	interest	in	music.
Instead	of	bringing	death	and	damnation	upon	my	beloved	people,	I	could	have

presented	 the	 world	 with	 hours	 of	 pleasant	 memories	 with	 the	 ragas	 I	 could
have	composed.	But	the	magnetic	pull	of	that	golden	throne	is	not	matched	by
anything	else	in	the	world.
I	 stood	 rooted	 to	 the	 spot	 and	 then	 slowly	 raised	 my	 sword	 and	 pressed
the	sharp	tip	against	Prahastha’s	chest.	I	raised	an	eyebrow	and	glared	at	him.
He	stood	there	without	flinching.	I	could	sense	the	tension	in	the	room.	Many
hands	had	gone	to	daggers	and	swords.
“Your	 Highness,	 your	 official	 coronation	 ceremony	 is	 not	 done.	 Until
then	 you	 cannot	 touch	 the	 throne.	 You	 cannot	 sit	 on	 it	 without	 your	 royal
crown.	Our	custom	dictates	that.”	Prahastha	addressed	me	evenly.	The	tension
in	 the	 room	 eased	 and	 I	 felt	 like	 a	 fool.	 I	 felt	 like	 slapping	 my	 own	 head.	 I
looked	 around	 and	 caught	 the	 eyes	 of	 Maricha.	 He	 had	 an	 uncharacteristic
frown	 on	 his	 face.	 Rudraka	 had	 a	 sneer	 and	 Jambumali	 and	 Malyvan	 were
discussing	 something	 with	 Sumali.	 Dhumraksha	 and	 Vajradhamstra	 were
standing	 near	 the	 round	 pillar	 on	 the	 farthest	 right	 corner	 and	 looking	 at	 me
with	unconcealed	hatred.	I	did	not	know	what	I	had	done	to	earn	their	hatred.	I
searched	 for	 a	 suitable	 chair	 to	 sit	 on	 and	 to	 my	 chagrin,	 there	 was	 only	 a
battered	old	wooden	chair	left.	With	some	reluctance,	I	pressed	myself	onto	the
seat,	half	expecting	a	bug	to	bite	me.	Maricha	noticed	my	predicament	and	tried
to	 lift	 his	 chair	 and	 bring	 it	 to	 me.	 I	 waved	 him	 away	 and	 sat	 down	 in	 the
creaking	chair.
Immediately,	 Prahastha	 called	 out	 in	 his	 tough	 harsh	 voice,	 “Council
meeting	commences.”
‘Wait	 a	 minute,	 had	 I	 not	 dismissed	 this	 stupid	 Council?	 Then	 why	 was
this	idiot	acting	as	if	we	were	going	to	sit	here	for	the	whole	day	like	the	olden
days	and	talk	and	talk	and	do	nothing?	Council,	my	foot!	If	I	did	not	act	now,	I
would	become	the	Sarpanch	of	the	Asura	race	and	not	its	king.’
“Has	it	escaped	you	that	the	Council	was	dismissed	long	before	we	ever
set	foot	on	this	island?	Next	time	I	hear	any	of	you	talking	about	the	Council,
you	 can	 catch	 the	 next	 ship	 to	 the	 mainland	 and	 join	 the	 old	 Emperor	 in	 his
mad	pursuits.	That	is,	if	I’m	in	a	good	mood.	God	forbid	if	my	mood	is	bad.
Then	you	can	expect	to	end	up	as	a	crocodile	meal	in	the	moat	aroundhe	and	jo
the	palace.	Do	I	make	myself	sufficiently	clear?”
“But.	 .	 .”	 Prahastha	 had	 gone	 all	 red	 and	 Jambumali	 was	 trying	 to	 say
something.
“And	I	do	not	care	if	it	violates	a	dozen	Asura	codes	and	customs.	I	make
my	 customs.	 I	 will	 act	 according	 to	 the	 rules	 I	 make.	 I	 am	 sick	 of	 these

thousand-year-old	traditions.	Just	to	prove	my	point,	I	am	going	to	sit	on	the
throne	 Kubera	 has	 left.	 I	 do	 not	 care	 for	 any	 ceremonies.	 I	 owe	 the	 kingdom
not	to	any	Asura	superstitions.	This	is	a	new	world,	a	modern	world,	and	let	the
beliefs	 and	 superstitions	 of	 the	 old	 India	 not	 tangle	 our	 march	 towards
progress.”
Before	 I	 could	 lose	 steam,	 I	 deliberately	 took	 the	 old	 wooden	 chair	 and
threw	 it	 at	 the	 nearest	 wall.	 It	 broke	 with	 a	 loud	 snap	 and	 I	 thought	 it	 was
symbolic.	 I	 turned	 swiftly	 and	 marched	 towards	 the	 throne.	 I	 could	 hear	 the
shocked	intake	of	breath	from	my	Council…and	my	ministers.	I	sat	down	with
a	flourish.	I	felt	some	trepidation,	and	then	a	shiver	and	thrill	passed	through
me.	I	slowly	leaned	back	until	my	head	touched	the	headrest.	My	hands	played
with	the	contours	of	the	huge	diamonds	on	the	armrest.	A	cold	breeze	blew	in
from	the	sea	and	streets	sounds	came	in	from	outside	the	palace.	All	was	well
with	 the	 world.	 And	 the	 world	 went	 on	 whether	 Ravana	 sat	 on	 a	 gaudy	 chair
with	 some	 ceremonies	 or	 without.	 The	 strange	 sense	 of	 elation	 I	 had	 felt	 a
moment	ago,	drained	away	to	be	replaced	by	a	sense	of	emptiness.	The	images
of	my	men	drowning	and	the	heart-wrenching	scenes	in	their	homes,	disturbed
my	 mind.	 ‘Was	 this	 two-feet	 thick	 cushion	 worth	 it?	 What	 had	 I	 become?	 A
pacifist?	My	ambition	was	to	conquer	the	world.	I	wanted	to	be	the	Emperor	of
India,	 the	 saviour	 of	 the	 Asura	 race,	 the	 benevolent	 ruler	 who	 would	 bring
prosperity	and	happiness	to	his	subjects.‘
I	 wondered	 why	 my	 ministers	 still	 stood.	 ‘Ah	 this	 was	 good.	 They	 were
waiting	 for	 permission	 from	 me.’	 I	 gestured	 for	 everyone	 to	 be	 seated.
Prahastha	 continued	 to	 stand.	 He	 struggled	 to	 say	 something.	 I	 deliberately
crossed	my	legs	and	started	massaging	my	left	heel.	I	balanced	my	leather	shoe
and	swung	it	with	my	toe.	I	thought	I	should	get	a	cobbler	to	stitch	a	few	pearls
on	my	footwear.	It	would	look	good.	My	gesture	of	superiority	was	not	lost	on
any	of	my	ministers.	I	was	happy	that	they	were	learning	fast	who	was	the	boss.
But	I	could	not	meet	Maricha’s	eyes.	It	would	have	been	embarrassing	for	both
of	us.
“Your	 Highness,”	 I	 noticed	 there	 was	 a	 small	 lisp	 in	 Prahastha’s	 voice,
“the	first	point	we	would	like.	.	.that	is.	.	.you	should	take	a	decision	on	is	the
fate	of	the	pirate-king	Varuna.”
I	 should	 have	 pointed	 out	 to	 him	 that	 a	 prime	 minister	 should	 not	 use
words	 like	 ‘you	 should’.	 I	 did	 not	 want	 anyone	 to	 speak	 to	 me	 in	 ornate
sentences	with	a	hundred	nuances.	I	had	made	my	point	and	I	did	not	want	to
press	 it	 any	 further.	 All	 said	 and	 done,	 if	 any	 of	 these	 ministers	 resigned,	 I

would	have	been	hard	pressed	to	find	a	suitable	replacement.
“What	is	your	advice,	Prime	Minister?”	I	was	sure	he	would	suggest	that
the	 pirate	 should	 be	 treated	 with	 full	 honours	 and	 given	 a	 royal	 reception
befitting	a	visiting	royal	dignitary	or	be	sent	free	with	lots	of	gifts.	He	would
back	 it	 up	 with	 some	 stories	 of	 some	 Asura	 king	 who	 may	 or	 may	 not	 have
lived	 a	 few	 thousand	 years	 ago,	 and	 who	 had	 treated	 his	 captives	 with	 great
respect.	I	would	have	liked	to	know	what	happened	to	that	magnanimous	king	a
few	 years	 after	 his	 splendid	 display	 of	 chivalry.	 Most	 probably	 the	 let-off
captive	 had	 come	 back	 with	 more	 might,	 conquered	 this	 king,	 and	 then
rendered	 the	 most	 inhumane	 punishment	 possible	 without	 a	 passing	 thought
about	 chivalry.	 But	 no	 one	 learns	 from	 history.	 Whether	 the	 Devas	 or	 the
Asuras,	 there	 are	 as,g,	 enough	 fools	 to	 add	 new	 chapters	 to	 this	 mutually
destructive	 competitive	 chivalry,	 though	 I	 must	 admit	 the	 Asuras	 do	 it	 more
often,	thanks	to	the	learned	men	like	Prahastha.	When	that	learned	man	voices
his	wooden-brained	opinion	about	chivalry,	I	was	going	to	blast	him.
Meanwhile,	 Vibhishana	 stood	 up	 and	 gave	 a	 long	 speech	 about	 Asura
chivalry	 and	 the	 humane	 treatment	 of	 prisoners-of-war.	 He	 managed	 to	 bore
and	irritate	all	those	present.	I	had	already	decided	what	punishment	should	be
meted	out	to	the	dreaded	pirate.	I	waited.	The	ascending	waves	of	murmurs	and
the	heavy	cloud	of	anticipation	had	created	a	surreal	quality.
Finally,	 after	 what	 seemed	 like	 an	 eternity,	 Prahastha	 began,	 “Your
Highness,	 we	 believe	 that	 the	 pirate-King	 should	 be	 executed.	 He	 is	 too
dangerous	 to	 be	 let	 off	 and	 he	 might	 turn	 against	 us	 when	 we	 are	 weakest.
Prudence	dictates	that	he	should	be	given	the	harshest	punishment	in	order	to
send	 a	 lesson	 to	 other	 enemies	 of	 the	 State	 and	 the	 Council.	 .	 .that	 is,	 we
ministers	suggest	that	he	should	be	summarily	executed.”
I	 was	 stunned.	 This	 was	 quite	 unexpected.	 I	 saw	 Sumali,	 Vajradhamstra
and	 Malyavaan	 furiously	 discussing	 it	 amongst	 themselves.	 Kumbha	 and
Vibhishana	were	debating,	while	Dhumraksha	sat	in	a	corner,	morose	at	being
ignored.	I	was	sure	I	was	in	a	fix.	If	I	let	off	Varuna,	it	would	be	like	siding	with
my	 brother	 Vibhishana,	 and	 if	 I	 executed	 him,	 it	 would	 seem	 I	 was	 being
controlled	by	Prahastha.	Oh	boy,	what	a	mess!
Prahastha’s	steely	glare	bored	into	me	as	if	challenging	me	to	contradict
him.	The	pirate-King	was	standing	there	unfazed.	Not	an	emotion	crossed	his
impassive	 face.	 I	 almost	 admired	 him	 for	 his	 coolness.	 The	 man	 was	 brave,
definitely	much	braver	than	me.	I	had	ended	up	in	a	deep	mess.	It	would	have
been	 easier	 to	 abide	 by	 the	 Council’s	 wishes	 and	 execute	 Varuna.	 But	 then,	 I

needed	to	assert	my	supremacy	over	them.	At	the	same	time,	I	could	not	let	off
the	pirate-King	with	great	honour	and	respect;	I	could	not	let	him	walk	free.
“I	am	not	going	to	execute	him.”	The	murmuring	stopped	suddenly.	After
a	few	moments	of	stunned	silence,	my	ministers	stood	up	one	after	the	other.	“I
think	I	owe	you	an	explanation.	It	is	not	my	intention	to	let	this	pirate	go	free.
I’ve	ordered	that	his	entire	fleet	of	ships	be	confiscated	and	added	to	the	royal
navy.	The	pirates	must	be	given	proper	military	training	and	absorbed	into	the
navy.	 And	 as	 for	 the	 pirate-King.	 .	 .”	 I	 walking	 towards	 Varuna.	 He	 towered
over	 me	 by	 at	 least	 half	 a	 foot.	 I	 stared	 into	 his	 eyes	 and	 through	 my	 teeth	 I
said,	“I	am	going	to	drag	him	through	the	streets,	shave	his	head	partially,	and
then	take	him	around	the	city	on	the	back	of	an	ass.	Then	I	am	going	to	conduct
the	marriage	of	this	pirate-king	with	a	pig.	This	will	be	at	the	expense	of	the
royal	treasury,	a	state	sponsored	wedding.	It	will	be	conducted	along	with	my
marriage.”
A	small	smile	twitched	at	the	corner	of	Varuna’s	mouth.	He	matched	my
stare	and	said,	”Ah	the	day	when	all	pigs	will	get	married.”
I	hit	him	across	 his	face,	the	laughter	of	my	ministers	burning	my	ears.
Then	I	also	caught	the	humour	of	Varuna’s	repartee	and	started	laughing.	Only
Prahastha	remained	still,	without	the	trace	of	a	smile	on	his	aristocratic	face.
“Your	Highness,	if	you	will	not	execute	this	prisoner,	may	I	suggest	that
he	be	imprisoned	for	life	in	a	dark	cellar,	and	no	further	insults	be	meted	out	to
him	in	public?”
“I	will	do	as	I	wish.	You	have	given	your	opinion.	Keep	your	council	to
yourself.”	 I	 snubbed	 Prahastha	 and	 the	 matter	 ended	 there.	 Or	 that	 is	 what	 I
thought.	 I	 walked	 out	 of	 the	 durbar	 with	 my	 ministers	 following	 me,	 while
Varuna	 was	 dragged	 out	 so	 his	 head	 could	 be	 shaved	 partially	 and	 for
ial>withother	abuses	and	tortures.
Maricha	and	Kumbha	caught	up	with	me	on	my	either	side.	“I	thought	you
were	going	to	execute	him,	Ravana.”	‘That	was	before	I	entered	the	durbar.’	I
could	see	surprise	in	Maricha’s	eyes	but	I	did	not	reply.
“I	have	a	suggestion.”	Kumbha	struggled	to	catch	up	with	me.	“Why	not
make	Varuna	our	admiral?”
“And	what‘s	the	guarantee	that	Varuna	will	not	attack	our	ships	once	he	is
out	of	Lankan	territorial	waters?”	I	asked	him.
“At	heart,	Varuna	is	more	of	a	businessman	than	a	pirate.	If	he	is	offered
favourable	 terms,	 he	 will	 stick	 to	 them.	 Of	 course,	 we	 should	 always	 remain
alert	and	not	trust	him	too	much.”

“And	what	do	we	gain	by	striking	a	deal	with	a	pirate?”
“A	secure	trade	route,	ports	free	from	pirate	attack,	revenue	from	security
for	foreigners,	and	plenty	of	goodwill	with	the	outside	world.”
“The	idea	doesn’t	excite	me.”	I	was	bent	on	insulting	the	pirate-King.	His
jeering	laugh	during	his	duel	with	me	inside	his	cabin,	still	rankled.
“I	 am	 with	 Prahastha	 in	 this	 matter,”	 Maricha	 intervened.	 “It	 is	 too
dangerous.	 I	 don’t	 know	 why	 you	 took	 such	 a	 stupid	 decision.”	 I	 remained
silent.	How	could	I	say	that	I	too	had	wanted	what	Prahastha	advised,	but	took
an	idiotic	decision	just	to	assert	myself?
Mother	was	standing	at	the	end	of	the	corridor.	The	fumbling	professor
Mayan,	 was	 also	 there,	 scribbling	 something	 furiously	 on	 a	 palm	 leaf.
“Maricha,	 please	 leave	 the	 children	 and	 come	 with	 me.	 We	 have	 important
things	to	discuss.”
Maricha	 gave	 me	 a	 wink	 and	 disappeared	 with	 my	 mother	 and	 the
professor.	I	knew	what	they	were	going	to	discuss.	So	this	was	it.	My	bachelor
days	were	about	to	end.	It	was	almost	noon.	Outside	the	palace,	the	market	was
slowly	 emptying	 as	 the	 city	 prepared	 for	 its	 afternoon	 siesta.	 A	 few	 kites
circled	 high	 in	 the	 sky,	 again	 and	 again	 and	 again.	 Somewhere	 outside,	 a
fishmonger	yelled	in	a	last	ditch	attempt	to	sell	off	his	day’s	basket	of	fish.	The
sea	 shimmered	 in	 the	 sunlight	 and	 reflected	 the	 afternoon	 sun	 in	 a	 thousand
little	 mirrors.	 Clouds	 were	 forming	 on	 the	 distant,	 western	 horizon.	 The
humidity	was	intolerable	and	the	air	hung	like	a	thick,	wet	carpet	over	the	city.
Standing	at	the	balcony	of	my	palace,	I	reflected	on	my	life.
The	 wedding	 was	 fixed	 for	 Friday,	 four	 days	 hence.	 I	 personally
supervised	all	the	arrangements,	not	for	the	marriage,	but	for	the	meting	out	of
the	greatest	possible	humiliation	and	torture	to	the	pirate-King.	I	could	not	help
admire	the	courage	of	the	man	–	he	took	it	all	without	a	murmur.	With	bloodcaked	 lips,	 Varuna	 smiled,	 showing	 off	 his	 broken	 teeth,	 when	 he	 saw	 me.	 I
raised	my	hand	to	hit	him,	looked	into	his	eyes,	and	stopped.	I	was	disgusted.
What	sort	of	a	hoodlum	was	I?
The	 marriage	 preparations	 were	 like	 a	 constant	 toothache.	 Hoards	 of
Asuras	 landed	 from	 the	 mainland	 in	 boats	 and	 motley	 ships.	 I	 had	 never
suspected	that	we	had	so	many	relatives.	Where	were	these	mobs	when	we	were
starving?	Obese	uncles	and	aunts	sailed	into	my	bedroom	just	to	see	how	‘our
boy	 Ravana’	 had	 grown	 up.	 One	 even	 dared	 to	 joke	 that	 the	 last	 time	 he	 had
seen	me,	I	had	looked	like	something	the	cat	had	chewed	out.	I	promptly	called
my	 guards	 and	 threw	 the	 old	 man	 out.	 Children	 ran	 around	 breaking	 crystal

vases	and	smearing	the	walls	of	the	palace,	babies	howled	in	the	night,	fat	black
Asura	 women	 lay	 on	 the	 floors,	 sofas,	 beds	 and	 steps	 –	 anywhere	 they	 could
find	 a	 place.	 They	 woke	 me	 just	 to	 tell	 me	 how	 very	 lucky	 I	 was	 to	 have
achieved	so	much	and	what	a	fine	lady	I	was	marrying.	Some	came	with	their
good-fornothing	sons	and	demanded	employment	for	them	in	governmeem	w
very	lnt.	Food	was	free	and	wine	flowed	like	a	river.

21	Happy	family
Ravana
My	 sister	 fluttered	 around	 showing	 off	 her	 newly	 made	 jewellery	 and
escorting	all	and	sundry	to	Mandodari’s	chamber	to	show	off	her	new	sisterin-law.	For	once	I	pitied	the	professor ’s	daughter.	I	had	to	keep	my	temper	in
check	and	smile	at	everyone	and	act	as	if	I	was	the	happiest	man	in	the	world.
The	strain	of	keeping	a	smiling	face	when	I	was	seething	inside,	started	telling
on	my	nerves.	By	Friday	morning,	my	smile	was	almost	a	grimace.	I	looked	in
the	 mirror	and	felt	sorry	for	 myself.	What	kind	of	marriage	was	this?	There
was	 no	 love,	 no	 romantic	 courtship,	 no	 whispers	 under	 the	 moon,	 no	 stolen
kisses;	in	fact	it	was	clinical.	Not	even	my	fertile	imagination	could	conjure	up
a	romantic	relationship	with	Mandodari.
I	was	woken	up	at	some	godforsaken	hour	on	Friday	morning	and	almost
dragged	 for	 a	 ritual	 bath	 at	 the	 palace	 lake,	 amidst	 peals	 of	 laughter.	 Gaping
men	 and	 women;	 elders	 commenting;	 girls	 giggling	 around	 corners;	 a
cacophony	of	noises;	the	aroma	of	flowers,	sweets,	fried	meat,	fruit	and	rotting
garbage	 in	 the	 streets	 of	 Lanka;	 milling	 crowds	 outside	 the	 fort	 jostling	 and
screaming	and	getting	fried	in	the	humid	tropical	heat;	cow	dung	–	fresh,	old,
dried,	burnt;	incense;	spices;	fish;	the	sickly	smell	of	the	creek,	and	a	million
other	things,	assaulted	my	senses.	I	was	led	to	a	room	where,	like	a	girl,	they
applied	 mehendi	 on	 my	 toes	 and	 palms.	 Old	 women	 sang	 suggestive	 songs	 –
old	 women	 who	 were	 shrivelled	 like	 sun-dried	 betel	 nuts,	 sang	 about	 the
pleasures	in	bed.	These	came	from	the	depths	of	the	human	soul	and	glorified
an	eternal	truth	–	procreation,	the	only	tool	for	the	survival	of	human	beings.	I
should	have	tried	not	to	laugh	at	them.
I	 was	 escorted	 to	 the	 palace	 hall	 where	 a	 stage	 had	 been	 erected.	 It	 was
gaudy	 and	 yet	 beautiful.	 Garlands	 of	 marigold	 and	 jasmine	 hung	 all	 over.	 A

huge	 painting	 of	 Shiva	 and	 Parvati	 formed	 the	 backdrop.	 And	 of	 all	 things,
three	 Brahmin	 priests	 sat	 croaking	 like	 frogs	 around	 a	 fire.	 What	 was	 this?
That	was	a	Deva	custom,	Asura	marriages	were	always	simple	affairs.	I	did	not
know	whose	idea	it	was.	Then	I	saw	my	father	had	come	and	was	sitting	in	a
huge	 chair.	 My	 mother	 sat	 on	 the	 floor,	 massaging	 his	 feet.	 My	 brother
Vibhishana	 was	 also	 reverently	 standing	 by.	 All	 my	 ministers,	 except
Prahastha,	 were	 present	 and	 standing	 in	 marked	 obsequiousness,	 as	 if	 paying
obeisance	 to	 a	 visiting	 Emperor.	 Soorpanakha	 was	 desperately	 trying	 to
impress	 our	 father,	 who	 was	 barely	 listening.	 The	 old	 lecher ’s	 eyes	 were
roving	over	the	body	of	the	maid	watering	the	plants	in	the	garden.
“The	 proud	 father	 meets	 the	 great	 achiever.	 Aha!	 What	 a	 melodramatic
scene.”	Kumbha	was	grinning.
“So	 you	 did	 not	 join	 the	 grand	 reunion?”	 I	 could	 barely	 conceal	 my
anger.
“I	 chose	 to	 give	 it	 a	 miss.	 I	 think	 I	 forgot	 the	 lines	 of	 the	 family	 song.”
Kumbha	was	laughing	now.	The	smell	of	country	liquor	hit	me	like	a	blast.	I
eyed	him	with	contempt.	Fat,	ugly,	with	a	huge	beer	belly,	he	looked	forty	and
not	twenty.	I	screamed,	at	him,	“How	dare	you	drink	like	this?”	I	grabbed	his
hair	and	banged	his	head	on	the	wall.	“You	good-for-nothing.	You	scoundrel.	.
.”	I	kept	banging	his	head	and	he	ineffectually	tried	to	parry	my	blows.
Hearing	 the	 ruckus,	 the	 family	 reunion	 broke	 up	 and	 they	 all	 came
running	 into	 the	 room.	 Kumbha	 had	 collapsed	 on	 the	 floor	 like	 a	 heap	 of
manure.	Blood	dripped	from	his	nose	and	he	moaned	in	pain.	Maricha	held	me
back.	Soorpanakha	screamed	at	the	sight	of	the	blood.	Smack!	My	ears	burned,
and	I	saw	with	astonishment	that	my	mother	had	cut	her	hand	on	my	ear	stud.
She	 had	 hit	 me	 –	 in	 front	 of	 my	 ministers,	 my	 servants,	 and	 now	 the	 story
would	 spread	 through	 the	 country	 like	 wildfire	 –	 a	 king	 who	 walked	 in	 the
shadow	 of	 his	 mother ’s	 pallu.	 A	 king	 who	 was	 treated	 like	 a	 baby	 by	 his
mother.
I	pushed	Maricha	aside	and	saw	him	fall	backwards	and	hit	his	head	on	the
floor,	 from	 the	 corner	 of	 my	 eye.	 I	 could	 not	 have	 cared	 less.	 I	 grabbed	 my
mother	 by	 her	 hair	 and	 dragged	 her	 out	 of	 the	 hall.	 The	 sight	 of	 Prahastha
standing	with	his	hands	folded	behind	his	back,	staring	at	me,	stopped	me	dead.
The	 grip	 on	 my	 mother	 loosened	 and	 she	 scrambled	 up.	 The	 horror	 of	 the
crime	 I	 had	 committed	 hit	 me	 like	 a	 thunderbolt.	 I	 was	 both	 shocked	 and
shattered,	but	in	some	corner	of	my	mind,	satisfied	and	happy.
“The	 prisoner	 is	 ready	 for	 the	 punishment,	 your	 Highness,”	 Prahastha

said,	with	a	slight	bow.	For	a	moment	I	went	blank.	Prisoner,	which	prisoner?	It
seemed	the	Varuna	affair	would	follow	me	to	my	deathbed.
“First	 you	 finish	 with	 me.	 I’m	 your	 first	 prisoner!”	 yelled	 my	 mother
behind	me.	“Shave	my	head	and	make	me	ride	round	the	town	naked	on	an	ass.
Why	did	you	stop?	You	scoundrel	son!”
I	 hung	 my	 head	 in	 shame.	 My	 mother ’s	 screaming	 had	 tuned	 into
hysterical	 sobs.	 My	 hands	 trembled.	 I	 could	 not	 face	 anyone.	 Someone	 put	 a
hand	on	my	shoulders.	“Kaikasi,	he	has	not	changed.	I’m	ashamed	to	say	I	sired
this	 demon.	 I	 thought	 I	 would	 grace	 this	 occasion	 and	 brought	 my	 learned
friends	 to	 perform	 this	 devil’s	 marriage.	 And	 this	 Satan	 hits	 his	 mother	 and
almost	murders	his	brother	in	front	of	my	friends!”
I	 felt	 the	 anger	 rising	 in	 my	 veins.	 I	 held	 onto	 the	 balustrade	 of	 the
verandah	with	a	deadly	grip.	Where	was	this	good-for-nothing	Brahmin	when
we	were	hungry?	Where	was	he	when	my	mother	begged	for	food	and	clothes?
Where	 was	 he	 when	 held	 precariously	 to	 live	 in	 our	 tiny	 cottage,	 swaying	 in
the	 monsoon	 squalls?	 And	 all	 the	 while	 this	 lecherous	 Brahmin	 had	 perhaps
been	sowing	his	wild	oats	in	the	brothels	of	the	mainland
“I	should	not	blame	him	alone.	He	is,	after	all,	an	Asura.	A	more	blighted
race	I	have	yet	to	see.	Debauchery,	sodomy,	avarice,	you	name	any	evil	and	this
devilish	race	can	easily	claim	monopoly	over	it.	Black-skinned,	ugly	creatures.
.	.“
“If	we	are	so	bad,	then	why	did	you	marry	my	sister?”	I	turned	in	surprise
at	 the	 sound	 of	 my	 uncle	 Maricha’s	 voice.	 He	 was	 cool	 but	 I	 could	 feel	 his
anger.
“Shut	up,	you	stupid	Asura,	I’m	talking	to	my	wife	and	son	and	I	do	not
answer	 to	 anyone	 like	 you.”	 A	 drop	 of	 red	 betel	 nut	 juice	 oozed	 from	 the
corners	of	my	father ’s	mouth.
Maricha	looked	at	him	with	contempt	and	then	turned	to	me.	I	drew	to	my
full	 height	 and	 stepped	 menacingly	 towards	 my	 father.	 He	 began	 to	 cower.	 I
towered	 over	 the	 poor	 fellow	 by	 almost	 two	 feet.	 I	 was	 angry	 enough	 to	 kill
him	with	a	blow	but	I	was	still	ashamed	at	what	I	had	done	to	my	mother.	My
mother	understood	this	was	the	decisive	moment	and	stepped	between	us.	She
put	her	hands	on	my	chest	and	shoved	me	back.	I	looked	at	her	face	and	again
the	shame	of	hitting	her	struck	me.
My	mother	spoke.	“I	am	leaving.	Your	father,	brothers,	sister	and	I,	will
never	again	step	into	your	home.	We	do	not	want	to	see	you	again.	And	when
we	die,	do	not	come	to	see	our	dead	bodies.	Power	has	made	you	into	a	demon.

You.	.	.you.	.	.will	never	find	peace.	.	.”
I	staggered	back	and	grabbed	the	pillar	in	the	corner	of	the	room	to	stop
me	 from	 collapsing	 to	 the	 floor.	 I	 saw	 my	 mother	 grab	 Soorpanakha’s	 hand.
She	was	sobbing	as	my	mother	tugged	at	her.	My	sister	lo.	M	the	pilloked	at	my
face	 and	 saw	 the	 tears	 flowing	 down	 my	 face.	 Slowly,	 deliberately,	 she	 freed
herself	 from	 my	 mother ’s	 grip.	 I	 could	 see	 the	 shock	 in	 my	 mother ’s	 face.
Mother	walked	to	Kumbha,	who	was	sprawled	on	the	floor.	He	had	passed	out.
“Kumbakarna,	 Kumbha,	 wake	 up!	 Wake	 up!”	 But	 all	 my	 mother ’s
screaming	 could	 not	 wake	 Kumbha	 from	 his	 drug-induced	 stupour.	 I	 almost
smiled.	“You	have	murdered	him,	Ravana.	You	have	killed	your	own	brother.”
The	 situation	 now	 bordered	 on	 the	 hilarious.	 “He	 is	 not	 dead,	 mother.
Your	 son	 is	 dead	 drunk.	 You	 could	 ask	 your	 fair	 and	 handsome	 husband	 to
carry	him	on	his	shoulders.”	I	laughed	out	loud	as	I	imagined	the	fat	buffoon
carrying	his	jumbo-sized	son	on	his	shoulders.
“Vibhishana,	 do	 you	 want	 to	 go	 with	 this	 great	 Deva	 gentleman,	 this
learned	Brahmin?”	I	asked	my	younger	brother,	as	I	walked	towards	him
“No	no	brother.	.	.I	mean.	.	.”	Vibhishana	stammered.	I	came	so	close	to
him	that	I	could	smell	the	sacred	ashes	he	had	smeared	on	his	forehead.	He	was
sweating.
“Why	will	you	not	accompany	your	Brahmin	father?	He	could	teach	you
all	sorts	of	mantras	and	make	you	into	a	high	class	robber.	You	could	perform
all	your	usual	mediations	and	have	Vishnu	or	Indra	or	some	Deva	God	as	your
personal	protector.	He	could	teach	you	all	that	and	more.”	I	walked	towards	my
father,	who	was	now	ashen	with	fear.	I	saw	the	Brahmins	had	stopped	chanting
mantras	and	one	of	them	was	actually	packing	whatever	he	could	lay	his	hands
on.	 The	 greed	 of	 that	 Brahmin	 for	 other	 men’s	 possessions	 was	 greater	 than
his	fear	of	death.	I	laughed	out	aloud.	One	of	the	Brahmins	jumped	out	of	the
window	with	two	of	my	good	brass	lamps	held	to	his	chest.	The	other	one	had
a	few	vessels	with	him	and	tried	to	sneak	out.	I	grabbed	him	by	his	top	knot.	He
fell	at	my	feet	and	started	mumbling	something.	I	thought	he	would	take	out	his
holy	water	from	his	jug	 any	instant	and	curse	me	and	 I’d	be	hopping	around
the	garden	as	a	toad.
It	 took	 some	 time	 for	 me	 to	 register	 that	 that	 he	 was	 praising	 me.	 By
Shiva!	I	had	to	pack	this	joker	off	before	he	spewed	a	mega	poem	in	my	praise,
delivered	 extempore,	 and	 that	 too	 from	 the	 extremely	 difficult	 position	 of
being	sprawled	flat	on	the	floor.	I	kicked	him	and	he	scrambled	up	and	ran	for
dear	life.	My	father	wanted	to	utter	some	curse,	but	because	of	his	fear,	he	was

unable	 to	 even	 open	 his	 mouth.	 My	 mother,	 with	 whatever	 dignity	 she	 could
muster,	took	my	father ’s	shaking	hands	in	hers	and	in	her	best	melodramatic
style,	proclaimed,	“I	will	not	step	into	this	hell	even	when	I	am	dead.	I	will	not
allow	 you	 or	 any	 of	 your	 siblings	 to	 see	 my	 dead	 body.	 And	 because	 of	 the
insult	to	your	parents,	you	will	pay.	I	do	not	know	in	this	world	or	the	next,	but
you	will	surely	pay	dearly	for	this.”
She	 walked	 out	 of	 my	 palace	 with	 my	 father	 trailing	 behind.	 The
onlookers	and	palace	servants,	the	dregs	of	society	who	had	assembled	to	peek
and	 secretly	 enjoy	 the	 palace	 drama,	 moved	 over	 aside	 to	 allow	 this	 motley
procession	to	pass.	The	two	Brahmins	and	a	few	servants	joined	them.	There
was	 a	 muffled	 cry	 from	 the	 corner	 of	 the	 room	 and	 I	 saw	 my	 dear	 sister,
sobbing	 uncontrollably	 with	 her	 face	 in	 her	 hands.	 Vibhishana	 stood
awkwardly	before	her.	I	went	to	her	and	put	my	hands	on	her	shoulders	and	she
fell	onto	my	chest	and	hugged	me	tight.	Had	I	failed	her?	Had	I	wronged	her?
Something	 pulled	 at	 me.	 ‘My	 dear,	 dear	 sister,	 what	 have	 I	 taken	 away	 from
you?’
“There.	.	.there.	.	.”	The	words	sounded	meaningless	even	to	me,	but	I	kept
repeating,	“There.	.	.there.	.	.”	Maricha	came	and	touched	my	shoulders	gently.
Prahastha	 sto	 Prbut	 I	 od	 like	 a	 pillar,	 with	 his	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 some	 unknown
point	in	the	distant	horizon.	I	lifted	my	sister ’s	chin	and	said	with	all	the	love	a
brother	could	muster,	“Soorpanakha,	whatever	happens,	whoever	walks	away
from	 our	 lives,	 I	 will	 be	 there	 for	 you,	 as	 a	 brother,	 a	 friend,	 a	 father,	 and
mother.	Don’t	you	trust	your	dear	brother?”
With	 tears	 glistening	 in	 her	 eyes,	 she	 smiled	 at	 me	 and	 nodded.	 I	 felt
afraid.	 Would	 I	 be	 able	 to	 keep	 this	 promise?	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to	 shatter	 her
innocence,	 so	 I	 kept	 running	 my	 fingers	 through	 her	 hair	 and	 held	 her	 for	 a
moment	 longer.	 Then	 my	 pride	 came	 back,	 my	 anger	 returned	 and	 I	 was
myself	again.	Slowly	but	firmly,	I	walked	out	of	the	room.	The	guards	at	the
door	 bowed.	 I	 knew	 they	 were	 sniggering	 inside,	 but	 I	 ignored	 them	 and
walked	 past	 to	 stroll	 in	 the	 garden.	 An	 epoch	 in	 my	 life	 was	 over.	 I	 was	 sad
beyond	words.	The	image	of	my	mother	and	her	struggles	to	keep	us	fed	and
clothed,	 our	 struggles	 to	 stay	 alive,	 the	 inspiration	 she	 had	 been	 to	 me,	 all
these,	like	indigested	food,	came	up	and	choked	me.
But	a	small	bubble	of	joy	started	growing	bigger	and	bigger	and	then	it
filled	my	whole	mind.	Free	at	last!	Free	from	the	protective	wings	of	mother
bird.	Now	what	was	there	to	stop	me?	No	morals	of	a	bygone	era,	no	voice	of
a	strict	mother,	no	one	who	I	really	respected,	to	tie	me	down	with	the	ropes	of

tradition.	Ravana	was	no	longer	a	boy.	Kingship,	from	then	on,	would	not	be	a
burden	 to	 carry.	 It	 came	 naturally	 to	 me.	 I	 enjoyed	 being	 the	 King,	 the
Emperor,	 the	 Lord	 of	 the	 world.	 That	 morning,	 on	 the	 day	 of	 my	 marriage,
Ravana	was	born	again.
Like	 all	 my	 dreams,	 this	 one	 too,	 was	 also	 shattered	 by	 none	 other	 than
Prahastha.	He	said	the	bride	was	waiting	to	be	married	and	the	prisoner	to	be
punished.	Wearily	I	stood	up	and	went	to	finish	off	my	chores.	In	the	days	to
come,	 I	 would	 dream	 and	 dream	 again.	 I	 had	 found	 the	 elixir	 of	 youth.	 The
elixir	 was	 never	 exhausted	 as	 long	 as	 I	 kept	 dreaming	 on	 a	 grand	 scale.	 And
my	dreams	became	my	story.

22	Revolutionaries
Bhadra
I	fell	into	the	mouth	of	death,	into	the	howling	ocean.	Just	as	I	was	about
to	give	up,	my	head	bobbed	above	the	heaving	waters.	I	spluttered	and	coughed
as	another	huge	wave	took	me	under.	It	hurt	in	a	hundred	different	parts	of	my
body.	It	would	have	been	so	easy	to	let	go	and	sink	deeper	into	the	bosom	of
the	sea.	But	the	images	of	my	wife	and	my	girl	butchered	by	the	Deva	devils,
danced	 before	 my	 eyes.	 It	 gave	 strength	 to	 my	 arms	 and	 power	 to	 my	 legs.	 I
started	kicking	again.	As	I	came	to	the	surface	again,	I	could	see	the	heaving
ships	 like	 dots	 on	 the	 distant	 horizon.	 I	 was	 being	 lashed	 by	 the	 tropical
hurricane.	Sheets	of	water	fell	on	my	face.	I	tried	to	keep	my	head	above	the
waves	but	did	not	know	where	to	swim	to.	I	bobbed	helpless	in	the	pitch	dark,
howling,	 heaving	 sea,	 with	 a	 threatening,	 grey	 sky	 covering	 this	 boiling	 and
bubbling	pot	of	rage.
Something	 was	 floating	 a	 few	 feet	 away.	 I	 swam	 towards	 that	 and	 was
horrified	 to	 see	 a	 slain	 soldier	 drifting	 like	 a	 log.	 I	 swam	 away	 as	 fast	 as	 I
could	 and	 tried	 staying	 afloat	 on	 my	 back.	 After	 a	 while	 I	 saw	 an	 old	 log
floating	at	a	distance	of	a	few	hundred	feet.	I	was	afraid	to	swim	towards	it	lest
it	turned	out	to	be	another	dead	soldier	or	pirate.	Finally,	I	decided	to	take	the
chance	 and	 swam	 towards	 it.	 It	 was	 an	 old	 tree	 trunk	 and	 I	 climbed	 on.	 I	 was
dead	 tired	 and	 clung	 on	 with	 all	 my	 strength.	 Twice	 I	 was	 knocked	 over	 by
rogue	waves,	but	the	sea	was	evidently	calming.	The	rain	weakened	to	a	drizzle
and	the	stars	came	out	in	the	inky	sky.	I	took	off	my	turban	and	tied	myself	to
the	 log	 and	 slept.	 When	 I	 woke,	 I	 stared	 at	 a	 once-familiar	 face.	 I	 tried	 to
recollect	the	face	but	my	head	throbb	Prbuen	I	wed.
“Will	he	live?”	I	heard	a	deep	voice	asking.
“I	 hope	 so,”	 a	 female	 voice	 answered.	 It	 came	 to	 me	 in	 a	 flash	 –	 Mala!

Mala,	my	mistress,	my	forgotten	sweetheart.	I	tried	to	sit	up	but	she	shoved	me
back.	I	wanted	to	ask	her	why	she	left	me	for	that	traitor.	I	wanted	to	scream	at
her,	tear	her	hair	and	kick	her.	I	wanted	to	kiss	her,	and	feel	her	rounded	hips.
But,	the	impotent	man	I	was,	I	just	lay	there,	a	tired	and	beaten	Asura.
A	shadow	moved	behind	her,	towards	the	lone	burning	oil	lamp	and	half
the	face	was	lit	in	the	flickering	light.	I	thanked	Shiva	for	not	letting	me	open
my	mouth.	It	was	none	other	than	Vidyutjihva.	Had	he	recognized	me,	I	would
have	been	long	dead.	Anger	and	jealousy	hit	me	with	a	force	greater	than	the
hurricane	I	had	escaped.	The	bitch	was	living	with	him.	He	was	sleeping	with
her.	The	tall,	fair	Asura	with	the	flowing	mane	and	aristocratic	nose,	the	deep,
black	 eyes	 and	 broad	 shoulders,	 the	 brilliant	 orator	 and	 master	 strategist,	 the
hero	 of	 hundreds	 of	 people,	 and	 the	 rival	 of	 my	 master,	 Ravana,	 stood	 there
with	 a	 contemptuous	 smile	 playing	 on	 his	 lips.	 I	 pitied	 myself.	 I	 could	 now
understand	why	Mala	chose	him	over	me.	I	was	a	nothing,	a	black	pot-bellied
Asura	 with	 crooked,	 yellow	 teeth	 and	 curly	 hair,	 short	 and	 plump.	 Could	 I
expect	a	beauty	like	Mala	to	choose	me	over	this	hero?	‘But	I	will	get	you	man.
One	 day,	 you	 will	 fall	 at	 my	 feet	 and	 beg.	 Then	 I	 will	 make	 you	 pay	 for	 that
contemptuous	 smile.’	 With	 the	 dreams	 of	 my	 grand	 revenge,	 I	 slowly	 faded
back	to	sleep.
When	I	woke	again,	it	was	almost	afternoon.	There	was	some	cold	gruel
on	the	crude,	unpolished	wooden	table	near	the	bed.	I	removed	a	dead	housefly
floating	on	the	surface	and	drank	the	gruel	in	quick	gulps.	Everything	was	still
outside.	 I	 was	 surprised	 to	 find	 the	 door	 was	 unlocked.	 I	 stood	 outside	 the
thatched	hut	and	squinted	in	the	blazing	white	sun.
“Where	 were	 you?	 I	 thought	 you	 had	 gone	 back	 to	 the	 mainland.”	 Mala
had	come	from	behind	the	house	and	stood	with	a	pile	of	washing	over	her	left
arm.	Water	dripped	from	the	clothes	and	formed	curious	designs	on	the	sand.
“I	worked	here	and	there	doing	odd	jobs,	trying	to	make	a	living.”	I	did
not	 want	 her	 to	 know	 what	 I	 had	 been	 doing.	 I	 smiled.	 “And	 what	 were	 you
doing?”	 Sleeping	 with	 that	 bastard,	 I	 wanted	 to	 ask,	 but	 looked	 away.	 I	 could
imagine	 them	 together.	 She	 sensed	 what	 I	 was	 feeling	 and	 came	 near	 me	 and
said	coldly,	“You	left	me	and	only	he	was	there.”
I	 tried	 to	 think	 of	 a	 dozen	 repartees	 that	 would	 sting	 her	 but	 could	 not
come	up	with	one.	Instead,	I	smiled	like	a	fool.
“Besides,	 you	 always	 treated	 me	 like	 a	 whore,	 just	 a	 thing	 of	 pleasure,
even	though	I	tried	to	love	you.	He	treats	me	like	a	real	woman.”
“I’m	poor	man	and	not	a	handsome	hero	with	ambitions	of	overthrowing

the	king.	So.	.	.”
“Go	 ahead,	 Bhadra,	 talk	 about	 all	 your	 shortcomings.	 You	 get	 some
perverse	 pleasure	 in	 talking	 about	 yourself	 like	 that.	 I’ve	 heard	 all	 this	 a
hundred	times	before	from	you.”
I	wanted	to	grab	and	hit	her	till	she	was	black	and	blue.	She	walked	past
me,	 beads	 of	 sweat	 gleaming	 on	 her	 back.	 I	 moved	 towards	 her	 and	 put	 my
hands	 around	 her	 waist.	 The	 clothes	 fell	 from	 her	 hands	 and	 she	 hugged	 me.
For	a	moment	there	was	an	animal	passion	between	us.	I	pressed	myself	against
her	firm	body	and	our	lips	met.	With	a	hurriedness	that	comes	from	deprival,	I
tried	touching	 her	 everywhere	at	once.	Two	 hands	were	not	enough.	I	almost
bit	her	lips	and	she	returned	my	kiss	with	equal	passion.	Then	all	of	a	sudden,
she	pushed	me	back.	I	tried	to	grab	her	again,	but	she	pushed	me	back	again.
“No.	.	.no.	.	.”	she	sobbing	hysterically.

Anger,	 jealousy	 and	 sadness,	 washed	 over	 me	 in
waves.	I	felt	like	tearing	her	apart.	Suddenly	I	was	seized
with	 a	 sense	 of	 utter	 helplessness.	 I	 left	 her	 there	 and
walked	 towards	 the	 cliffs.	 I	 felt	 like	 jumping	 off	 and
finishing	 everything	 there	 and	 then.	 I	 felt	 so	 lonely,	 so
unwanted.	I	sat	on	a	rock,	afraid	to	jump	and	afraid	to	go
back	to	life.	I	could	see	the	golden	flag	of	my	King	flying
above	 the	 castle,	 flapping	 in	 the	 wind	 against	 a	 dark,
black	storm	cloud.	I	sat	there	for	hours	until	the	first	drop
of	rain	hit	me.	Then	I	walked	back	to	my	life.	By	the	time
I	reached	my	hut,	I	was	wet	through	but	too	tired	to	care.
I	 lay	 on	 my	 bed	 and	 watched	 a	 lizard	 waiting	 to	 pounce
on	 a	 fly,	 when	 I	 heard	 a	 soft	 rap	 on	 the	 door.	 Before	 I
could	 stand,	 Mala	 entered	 the	 room.	 I	 watched	 her	 with
mounting	irritation	but	before	I	could	give	vent	to	it,	the
tall	figure	of	Vidyutjihva	came	in.
“Be	seated,	be	seated,”	he	told	me.	“Mala	says	you	are	looking	for	a	job.
This	is	a	fighting	organization	and	not	a	trade	guild.	There	is	no	specific	job

defined	 for	 each.”	 He	 became	 animated	 and	 walking	 to	 and	 fro,	 his	 arms
moving	 in	 an	 exaggerated	 fashion.	 “We	 are	 here	 to	 create	 an	 equal	 and	 just
world.	There	is	no	place	for	tyrants	like	Ravana	in	the	world	we	want	to	create.
Everyone	will	be	equal.	There	will	not	be	kings	or	landlords.	There	will	not	be
any	exploiters	of	the	people	like	priests,	magicians	or	traders.	All	people	will
be	equal	in	the	new	world	I	create.”	He	paused	for	breath	and	the	subtle	change
from	‘we’	to	‘I’	did	not	escape	my	notice.
“The	evil	of	the	caste	system	will	be	wiped	off.	I	will	abolish	trade	guilds.
A	council	of	people	will	determine	what	each	one	of	us	should	have.	I	will	not
accept	 any	 form	 of	 exploitation.	 Blood-sucking	 leeches	 like	 Kubera,	 will	 be
killed.	 The	 Ravanas	 of	 the	 world	 will	 be	 crushed.	 There	 won’t	 be	 any	 Gods.
The	Indras	of	the	world	will	be	vanquished.	There	will	be	no	Godmen,	nothing
called	 money.	 People	 will	 serve	 each	 other	 and	 be	 happy.	 The	 world	 will
belong	to	people	like	Bhadra,	ordinary,	common	folk.	I	will	create	a	paradise
for	people	like	you,	Bhadra.	Join	us	in	this	final	fight	for	an	ideal	world.”
I	 do	 not	 say	 that	 I	 was	 not	 moved.	 The	 idea	 of	 owning	 the	 world	 was
appealing.	I	did	not	even	own	two	pieces	of	good	clothes,	let	alone	a	brave	new
world.	 But	 then,	 the	 idiot	 that	 I	 am,	 I	 never	 believed	 him.	 I	 acted	 as	 if	 I	 was
excited	 by	 his	 idea,	 but	 deep	 down	 I	 knew	 he	 was	 just	 another	 tyrant	 in	 the
making.	My	limited	intelligence	refused	to	grasp	the	great	man’s	vision.	I	felt
he	was	a	hypocrite	like	all	the	others,	like	me,	like	Ravana,	like	every	human
being	 I	 had	 ever	 seen.	 Mine	 was	 a	 cynical	 view	 of	 the	 world,	 a	 far	 cry	 from
Ravana’s	 vision	 of	 a	 grand	 revival	 of	 Asura	 civilization,	 or	 Vidyutjihva’s
dream	of	an	equitable	social	order,	where	he	could	play	God.	The	philosophy
of	 the	 common	 man,	 in	 Vidyuatjihva’s	 words,	 could	 be	 summarized	 in	 six
words,	What	 is	 in	 it	 for	 me?	 I	 was	 all	 for	 an	 equitable	 world.	 Or	 even	 for	 a
grand	Asura	civilization,	if	I	could	benefit	from	it.	I	wanted	my	revenge,	two
square	meals,	sex,	and	if	possible,	a	chance	to	acquire	wealth	and	position	so
that	 I	 could	 continue	 to	 treat	 other	 common	 men	 in	 the	 same	 way	 they	 were
treating	me	now	–	with	contempt.
I	smiled	at	my	own	philosophy	and	Vidyutjihva	took	it	as	agreement.	He
slapped	me	on	my	shoulders	and	hugged	me,	careful	to	keep	our	bodies	apart.
All	 men	 may	 be	 equal,	 but	 not	 that	 equal.	 “Come	 over	 to	 our	 training	 class.
Mala,	 see	 that	 he	 is	 fed	 and	 clothed	 properly.	 And	 ask	 him	 to	 bathe.”
Vidyutjihva	 went	 out	 with	 his	 silk	 robes	 flowing	 behind.	 His	 equal,	 Bhadra,
stood	there	with	his	mistress,	Mala.	Is	mine	bigger	than	his	or	is	it	equal?	I	kept
wondering.

“You	do	not	believe	him?”	Mala	asked.
“Do	you?”	M‫ۀ‬Dhis	ala	let	out	a	sigh	and	went	out.	I	followed	her,	curious
to	 know	 the	 training	 the	 rebels	 were	 imparting.	 I	 was	 handed	 over	 some
bathing	herbs	and	a	towel,	by	another	equal	of	Vidyutjihva’s,	a	puny	Asura	with
sores	on	his	bare	toes,	who	wore	torn	clothes.	I	walked	towards	the	small	well
to	 bathe.	 I	 scrubbed	 the	 places	 Vidyutjihva	 had	 touched.	 But	 the	 stench	 of
equality	stuck.	Soon,	I	got	used	to	that	too.

23	Revolution	comes	home
Bhadra
I	 had	 become	 Vidyutjihva’s	 confidante	 in	 a	 matter	 of	 days.	 News	 kept
coming	 in	 from	 the	 palace	 from	 the	 rebel	 leader ’s	 spies.	 I	 learnt	 Varuna	 had
been	captured.	After	punishing	the	pirate-king,	Ravana	had	let	him	take	charge
of	 protecting	 the	 Lankan	 coast	 and	 any	 territory	 Ravana	 might	 capture	 in	 the
future.	 I	 doubted	 the	 wisdom	 of	 making	 the	 pirate-King	 the	 admiral	 of	 the
royal	 navy,	 but	 the	 learned	 ones	 knew	 better.	 I	 also	 learnt	 that	 the	 King’s
mother	 has	 left	 the	 island	 after	 a	 spat	 with	 her	 son.	 Prince	 Kumbakarna	 was
now	a	total	addict	to	drugs,	bhang,	alcohol,	gambling,	and	women,	not	always
in	that	order.	Ravana	had	extended	control	over	all	of	Lanka,	except	the	small
north-eastern	 tip,	 which	 was	 wild	 country	 and	 where	 my	 new	 master ’s	 sway
was	not	strong.
I	had	yet	to	decide	who	my	master	would	be,	whether	I	should	hitch	my
fortune	to	Ravana	or	Vidyutjihva.	For	now,	the	chances	favoured	Ravana,	and	I
should	 have	 gone	 back.	 But	 something	 kept	 telling	 me	 that	 my	 future	 was
linked	 to	 the	 charismatic	 rebel	 leader.	 Moreover,	 he	 seemed	 gullible,	 and
except	for	his	grand	ego	and	fantastic	theories	about	social	equality,	he	was	the
better	 person	 to	 be	 around.	 Even	 though	 his	 attempts	 at	 treating	 us	 all	 as	 his
social	equals	was	just	play	acting,	the	cadres	went	along	with	it	as	no	one	had
even	pretended	to	be	like	this.	Once	in	a	while,	I	would	sneak	kisses	with	Mala,
though	I	had	yet	to	share	her	bed.	This	added	to	the	appeal	of	staying	put	with
the	rebel	leader.
One	day,	Vidyutjihva	called	me	to	the	beach.	It	was	late	evening	and	there
was	 a	 full	 moon.	 The	 sea	 glistened	 silver	 and	 there	 was	 the	 fragrance	 of
jasmine	in	the	air.	A	song	drifted	lazily	from	the	camps,	a	song	of	love	lost	and
found	and	the	ecstasy	of	reunion,	which	men	yearn	for	when	their	stomachs	are

full	and	their	bodies	healthy.	The	leader	was	standing	on	a	rock	jutting	over	the
sea.	I	climbed	up.	I	was	afraid.	Had	he	found	out	I	had	kissed	his	mistress?
“Are	you	ready	for	a	night	cruise?”	I	could	not	see	his	face,	so	I	could	not
decide	whether	he	was	angry.
“Yes.”	 I	 mumbled.	 He	 pushed	 me	 aside	 and	 started	 down	 the	 rough-cut
steps	to	the	beach.	A	small	country	boat	bobbed	up	and	down	in	the	water.	He
jumped	into	it	and	I	stumbled	in	behind.	With	broad	sweeps	of	the	oar	he	cut
across	the	waves.	After	a	few	minutes,	he	motioned	me	to	take	over.	I	started
pulling	 the	 oars	 and	 steered	 the	 boat	 in	 the	 direction	 he	 pointed.	 As	 we
approached,	I	could	see	the	dark	silhouette	of	the	castle	on	the	cliff.	Mist	had
crept	 over	 the	 higher	 slopes	 of	 Trikota	 hill.	 In	 the	 night,	 the	 palace	 looked
eerie.	It	was	as	if	it	was	haunted	by	demons.	All	the	old	stories	about	evil	spirits
and	Rakshasas	began	to	play	tricks	in	my	mind.	Slowly	the	boat	reached	shore.
“Stay	 here	 till	 I	 come.”	 Vidyutjihva	 moved	 towards	 the	 rear	 gate	 of	 the
fort.	He	walked	with	the	confident	gait	of	a	man	who	had	done	this	a	hundred
times.	 I	 was	 in	 my	 old	 master ’s	 palace,	 with	 the	 rebel	 leader.	 If	 I	 got	 caught,
death	 was	 certain.	 Instinctively,	 I	 moved	 towards	 the	 shadows	 of	 the	 rocks.	 It
was	 getting	 cold	 and	 I	 rubbed	 my	 hand Dhi	 palas	 together.	 The	 water	 was
comparatively	warmer.	It	was	almost	an	hour	before	my	master	returned	in	an
expressive	and	joyous	mood,	humming	a	song.	The	tune	haunted	me	long	after
we	had	reached	our	shore	and	my	master	had	retired	to	his	cottage.	I	took	the
song	to	my	bed	that	night.
I	accompanied	my	master	again	on	his	nightly	sojourns.	I	grew	more	and
more	curious	about	what	was	happening.	I	wondered	how	he	entered	Ravana’s
fort	undetected	and	came	back	unharmed.	It	was	obvious	that	an	insider	helped
him.	But	it	was	big	risk	to	take.	The	King’s	entire	army	was	searching	for	him
dead	 or	 alive,	 and	 here	 he	 was,	 roaming	 around	 the	 King’s	 grounds	 with
impunity.	The	audacity	of	the	act	was	awe-inspiring.
I	was	called	once	more	to	be	his	oarsman.	I	wanted	to	put	an	end	to	my
burning	 curiosity	 and	 decided	 to	 follow	 him.	 I	 waited	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 and
then	started	behind	him.	He	walked	fast,	without	looking	back,	not	even	caring
to	 keep	 to	 the	 shadows.	 As	 he	 reached	 the	 fort	 gate,	 he	 turned	 left.	 I	 was
perplexed.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 knew,	 there	 was	 no	 gate	 or	 entrance	 there.	 As	 I	 got
closer,	I	saw	the	answer	–	a	rope	dangled	down	the	sheer	wall.	He	climbed	up
and	vanished	over	the	high	wall	in	a	trice.	I	went	close	and	examined	the	rope.
It	 swayed	 and	 I	 tugged	 it	 to	 see	 whether	 it	 would	 hold	 my	 weight.	 It	 was	 a
foolish	 thing	 to	 have	 done	 since	 I	 had	 seen	 it	 take	 the	 weight	 of	 a	 giant	 like

Vidyutjihva.
I	 climbed	 up	 with	 great	 difficulty.	 By	 the	 time	 I	 reached	 the	 top,	 I	 was
drenched	 in	 sweat	 and	 puffing	 and	 panting.	 I	 cursed	 as	 I	 slowly	 dropped	 into
the	fort	compound.	The	silence	was	total	and	frightening.	Somewhere	an	owl
hooted.	 Instinctively	 I	 reached	 for	 my	 dagger	 but	 I	 had	 forgotten	 it.	 Cursing
myself	 again,	 I	 tried	 to	 get	 my	 bearings.	 Odd	 rays	 of	 light	 flickered	 through
bushes	in	the	garden.	The	sky	was	overcast	and	heavy.	There	was	a	noise	like
the	rustling	of	clothes	and	a	muted	whisper	somewhere	nearby.	I	slowly	moved
towards	the	sounds.	In	the	darkness,	two	shadows	were	embracing	each	other
and	kissing	passionately.	I	could	see	the	tall	figure	of	Vidyutjihva.	The	woman
seemed	familiar,	but	I	could	not	place	her.	I	watched	for	a	few	minutes	and	then
the	woman	moved	back.	Princess	Soorpanakha!	Cozying	up	to	the	arch	enemy
of	the	State!	I	was	shocked.
A	plan	formed	in	my	mind.	This	was	the	chance	to	do	away	my	rival.	It
was	at	that	moment	that	I	chose	between	my	two	masters.	By	the	time	I	reached
near	 the	 palace,	 I	 was	 bubbling	 with	 joy	 and	 enthusiasm.	 I	 would	 kill	 many
birds	at	once.	I	would	eliminate	my	rival	Vidyutjihva,	enter	the	good	books	of
Ravana,	 own	 Mala,	 and	 ensure	 that	 the	 Asura	 clan	 would	 not	 be	 divided
between	 two	 charismatic	 and	 powerful	 leaders.	 Vidyutjihva	 had	 foolishly
entered	 Ravana’s	 fort	 alone,	 unprotected,	 unguarded	 mentally	 and	 physically.
This	was	my	chance	to	strike.	I	needed	to	see	the	King	privately	and	pass	on	the
news.
I	was	not	sure	where	his	chamber	was	located.	Surely	it	would	be	heavily
guarded?	The	only	thing	I	could	be	sure	of	was	the	basic	lethargy	of	my	race.	It
was	 late	 and	 the	 guards	 would	 be	 asleep	 or	 drunk.	 The	 ferocious	 Asura	 of
daytime	 battlefields	 was	 a	 different	 creature	 from	 the	 fun-loving,	 womanchasing,	brawler	of	the	night.	This	could	have	been	one	of	the	Asura’s	best	kept
secrets.	To	defeat	the	Asuras,	attack	late	at	night.	This	could	be	why	the	ancient
Asura	 code	 insisted	 on	 Dharmayudha,	 where	 war	 was	 based	 on	 ethical
principles	and	the	most	important	thing	was	that	no	battles	were	fought	at	night.
I	went	around	the	palace	once,	keeping	to	the	cover	of	the	hedges,	to	see
which	was	the	best	access	point.	I	scrambled	up	a	mango	tree	and	hoped	that	the
balcony	 windows	 would	 be	 open.	 It	 was	 hot	 and	 humid.	 Somebody	 coughed
and	I	froze.	I	could	hear	my	heart	thumping.	I	stood	still	for	a	few	minutes	and
then	moved	again.	All	the	winn.	dows	wdows	opening	onto	the	verandahs	were
closed.	I	cursed.	Time	was	running	short.	If	Vidyutjihva	returned	to	the	boat	or
the	 princess	 saw	 me	 on	 her	 way	 back,	 I	 could	 start	 my	 last	 prayers.	 One

window	was	open.	I	moved	near	it.	Someone	was	sleeping	on	the	bed	inside	the
room.	I	wasn’t	sure	if	it	was	the	king	as	there	was	no	bride	beside	him.	But	his
profile	 resembled	 the	 king.	 I	 hesitated,	 but	 I	 knew	 time	 was	 running	 out.	 A
small	oil	lamp	burned	near	the	bed.	The	face	lay	in	shadow.
I	 entered	 the	 room	 and	 whispered,	 “Your	 Highness.	 .	 .”	 There	 was	 no
response	 and	 I	 moved	 closer	 to	 make	 sure	 it	 was	 Ravana.	 Suddenly,	 like	 a
pouncing	tiger,	the	man	jumped	on	me	and	seized	me	by	the	throat.	I	was	too
frightened	 to	 speak.	 With	 his	 other	 hand,	 he	 brightened	 the	 lamp.	 To	 my
horror,	I	found	I	was	in	the	wrong	room.	Not	to	say	that	the	treatment	would
have	been	different	had	I	been	in	the	right	room.	But	it	was	terrifying.	The	man
holding	me	by	my	throat	was	Vibhishana.	Of	all	the	people	in	the	palace,	I	had
ended	 up	 in	 the	 room	 of	 this	 pious	 rascal.	 I	 was	 more	 afraid	 as	 he	 was
unpredictable.	 I	 trembled	 with	 fear.	 He	 slowly	 loosened	 his	 grip	 and	 set	 me
down	 and	 I	 collapsed	 onto	 the	 floor.	 He	 towered	 over	 me	 with	 his	 sword
drawn.
“Don’t	kill	me,	my	Lord,	please	do	not	harm	me.”	I	cried.
“Bhadra,	you	scoundrel,	you	were	trying	to	murder	me.	You	are	either	a
ghost	 or	 you	 refuse	 to	 die!”	 It	 appeared	 that	 he	 was	 also	 confused.	 Taking
advantage	 of	 his	 predicament,	 I	 continued	 to	 plead.	 He	 stamped	 his	 foot	 in
anger.	 I	 stopped	 whimpering	 and	 crawled	 back	 to	 the	 wall	 and	 curled	 into	 a
ball.	I	was	still	shaking.	His	anger	was	unnerving.	I	had	always	suspected	that
he	was	a	dangerous	man	and	his	characteristic	calm	and	poise	was	just	a	mask,
but	seeing	him	with	his	sword	poised	to	thrust	into	me	and	the	mad	gleam	in
his	eyes,	I	was	certain.	I	was	sure	he	was	the	most	cunning	and	ruthless	of	all
men	I	had	ever	seen.	He	would	go	to	any	extent	to	achieve	his	ambition.	He	was
unlike	his	brother,	Ravana,	who,	though	an	egomaniac,	was	a	nice	person	with
compassion	in	his	heart	and	a	sense	of	justice	and	righteousness.	This	man	was
the	 devil	 incarnate.	 He	 was	 passionless	 and	 his	 piety	 and	 humility	 were	 all
pretence.	He	would	not	hesitate	to	kill,	maim	or	serve	anyone	if	it	served	his
purpose.	He	hid	his	ambitions	well,	but	in	the	flickering	light	of	the	oil	lamp
and	the	ghastly	shadow	it	produced	on	the	opposite	wall,	I	could	see	through
his	 soul.	 Perhaps	 I	 saw	 the	 evil	 shadows	 of	 the	 future	 also.	 What	 the	 great
learned	 ministers	 or	 all-powerful	 Ravana	 did	 not	 even	 suspect,	 Bhadra,	 the
country	bumpkin,	knew.	One	day,	if	an	opportunity	presented	itself,	this	bastard
would	 sell	 his	 soul	 for	 a	 piece	 of	 land	 or	 some	 gold	 coins.	 I	 fell	 at	 his	 feet
again.
“What	are	you	doing	in	my	room?”	His	voice	had	a	sinister	edge.

“Sir,	I	was	afraid	to	tell	His	Highness.	You	know	his	anger.	But	you	take
decisions	with	a	calm	mind	and	do	only	what	is	right.	.	.”
“You	idiot,	how	dare	you	enter	the	palace	at	dead	of	night?	Did	nobody
stop	you?	Where	are	the	palace	guards?”	His	voice	rose	each	moment.
“My	Lord,	my	lord.	.	.please.	.	.This	is	a	matter	of	utmost	importance	and
secrecy.	Please	do	not	call	the	guards.	.	.”
He	kicked	me	and	I	groaned.
“Why	should	I	not	call	the	guards?	You	should	be	hanged.”
“This	involves	your	sister.	She	is	meeting	with	someone.	.	.please	do	not
kick	me.	.	.”
He	stopped	and	raised	me	from	the	floor	by	my	throat	and	whispered	in	a
malicious	hiss,	“What	have	you	got	to	do	with	my	sister,	son	of	a	swine?”
Between	 the	 choking	 and	 coughing,	 I	 managed	 to	 say	 with	 some
satisfaction,	 “Vidyutjihva,	 the	 rebel	 king	 and	 traitor	 your	 people	 have	 been
huntinve	 ot	 to	 dg	 for	 the	 last	 few	 months,	 is	 with	 your	 sister	 now,	 in	 the
garden.”	 I	 completed	 my	 words	 with	 a	 smirk.	 ‘Take	 that,	 you	 blue	 blooded
Asura	bastard.’
He	threw	me	to	the	floor,	but	I	could	feel	his	strength	had	ebbed.	He	sat	on
the	bed	tired,	not	knowing	 what	to	do.	My	time	was	running	out	and	I	had	 to
think	fast.	“Shall	we	call	Lord	Maricha,	Sir?”
“I	 will	 go.	 Are	 they	 still	 there?”	 He	 slowly	 stood	 up	 and	 put	 the	 sword
back	into	its	sheath	and	belted	it	round	his	waist.
I	 could	 not	 resist	 adding,	 “They	 couldn’t	 have	 finished	 by	 now.”	 He
glared	 at	 me	 and	 I	 expected	 another	 blow,	 but	 he	 simply	 walked	 out	 of	 the
room.	 I	 followed	 in	 his	 wake.	 Maricha	 slept	 on	 the	 ground	 floor,	 with	 his
family.	We	descended	the	wooden	stairs.	He	paused	for	a	few	seconds	before
Maricha’s	 room,	 and	 then	 knocked	 softly.	 There	 was	 no	 response	 for	 some
time	 and	 so	 he	 knocked	 again.	 After	 a	 few	 minutes	 of	 silence,	 we	 heard	 the
rustle	of	clothes	and	someone	walking	with	heavy	steps	on	the	wooden	floor.
The	 door	 creaked	 open.	 Maricha	 stood	 with	 sleepy	 eyes	 and	 was	 visibly
irritated.
“Uncle,	 we	 have	 a	 problem	 with	 Soorpanakha.”	 Suddenly	 Maricha	 was
alert.	He	closed	the	door	behind	him	and	came	out.	Vibhishana	explained	and
when	 he	 mentioned	 me,	 Maricha’s	 eyes	 expanded	 with	 surprise.	 He	 heard
everything	 and	 went	 back	 into	 the	 room.	 When	 he	 came	 out,	 he	 was	 fully
armed.	We	moved	out	of	the	palace	past	the	snoring	guards.	When	we	reached
the	garden,	I	pointed	to	the	place	where	his	sister	was	and	slowed	down	to	hang

back.	 The	 two	 warriors	 approached	 from	 either	 side.	 Suddenly	 there	 was	 a
piercing	 scream	 and	 I	 saw	 the	 princess	 run	 into	 the	 palace.	 She	 was	 almost
nude.	 Then	 there	 was	 the	 noise	 of	 a	 scuffle	 and	 Maricha,	 seeing	 that	 the
princess	 had	 reached	 the	 palace	 safely,	 shouted	 for	 the	 guards.	 Vidyutjihva
fought	bravely	and	would	have	murdered	Vibhishana,	had	not	scores	of	armed
guards	arrived	and	captured	him.	The	guards	were	sleepy,	drunk	and	slow,	but
numbers	did	matter.
At	 last	 I	 was	 free!	 Now	 I	 could	 have	 Mala	 for	 myself.	 I	 did	 not	 have	 to
share	 her	 with	 wooly-eyed	 aristocrats	 with	 illusions	 of	 grandeur.	 I	 wanted	 to
howl	and	dance	and	sing.	But	I	remained	hidden	in	the	bushes.	In	the	event	of
Vidyutjihva	 doing	 some	 heroic	 act	 and	 escaping	 or	 becoming	 the	 top	 dog	 in
the	scuffle,	I	did	not	want	to	be	caught	on	the	wrong	foot.

24	Death	of	a	revolutionary
Ravana
I	lay	and	tossed	on	my	bed.	Sleep	eluded	me.	Today	too	I	ended	without
sex	with	my	wife.	I	had	always	thought	I	had	a	tremendous	sex	drive.	But	my
marriage	has	been	a	disaster	from	the	first.	On	the	first	night,	my	frigid	wife
refused	 to	 even	 undress.	 She	 submitted	 to	 my	 half-hearted	 caresses	 with	 an
immobility	that	bordered	on	death.	She	tried	to	be	a	model	wife	as	far	as	other
things	were	concerned.	She	took	care	of	me	like	a	small	child,	which	irritated
me	to	the	core.	She	was	kind	to	all	and	sundry,	and	tried	to	run	the	palace	like	a
village	 housewife.	 But	 three	 times	 in	 my	 four	 months	 of	 marriage,	 when	 I
attempted	to	get	close,	she	was	like	a	wooden	block.	I	lost	arousal,	both	sexual
and	mental,	in	a	few	seconds.	After	that,	I	did	not	dare	attempt	anything.	Night
after	 night,	 I	 spent	 hours	 on	 my	 bed	 irritated	 with	 myself,	 my	 wife,	 and	 the
whole	world,	while	my	wife	slept	soundly	beside	me,	fully	covered	like	an	old
woman,	without	any	concern	that	her	husband	lay	wide	awake,	hating	her	every
moment	for	her	indifferent	attitude	towards	him.
There	 were	 noises	 somewhere	 out	 in	 the	 garden.	 Wearily	 I	 got	 up	 from
my	 bed	 and	 went	 to	 the	 window.	 It	 was	 closed.	 Even	 in	 the	 hot,	 tropical	 ve
ot/fonights,	 my	 wife	 did	 not	 allowed	 me	 to	 open	 the	 windows.	 That	 was
another	 thing	 that	 irritated	 me.	 I	 prised	 the	 window	 open	 and	 the	 sounds
became	 clearer.	 Some	 scuffle	 was	 going	 on.	 Blasted	 Asuras,	 some	 soldiers
must	 have	been	 fighting	after	a	good	drinking	session.	Someone	knocked	 on
the	door.	Before	I	could	reach	the	door	to	open	it,	the	knocking	became	louder.
I	opened	the	door,	glancing	back	at	the	queen.	She	slept	like	a	baby,	unmindful
of	 all	 the	 commotion	 around.	 Uncle	 Maricha	 was	 standing	 outside,	 fully
armed,	 and	 before	 I	 could	 ask	 anything,	 he	 gestured	 for	 me	 to	 remain	 silent,
grabbed	my	left	hand	and	dragged	me	out.

“We	 have	 a	 problem.”	 Maricha	 whispered	 in	 my	 ear.	 I	 braced	 myself	 to
hear	 the	 news	 of	 an	 imminent	 attack	 by	 some	 Deva	 army	 or	 Varuna	 turning
against	us.	I	never	imagined	it	would	involve	my	sister.	And	of	all	the	rascals
and	 goons	 on	 earth,	 I	 did	 not	 imagine	 Vidyutjihva	 would	 be	 the	 person
involved	 with	 my	 sister.	 In	 growing	 surprise,	 then	 in	 dismay	 and	 anger,	 I
listened	to	the	licentious	story	of	my	sister ’s	nocturnal	adventures.	She	had	shut
herself	in	her	room	and	refused	to	come	out.	The	only	good	news	I	heard	that
night	was	that	the	biggest	rebel	and	my	rival,	Vidyutjihva,	had	been	captured.
And	 surprise,	 surprise,	 it	 had	 been	 my	 pious	 brother,	 Vibhishana,	 who	 had
done	a	worthwhile	act	for	once	in	his	life.
I	did	not	even	bother	to	put	on	my	sandals	or	my	shawl.	I	asked	Maricha
to	call	all	the	ministers	to	court	and	immediately	commence	a	trial.	I	walked	as
fast	 as	 I	 could	 towards	 the	 durbar.	 I	 was	 sure	 my	 wife	 would	 not	 even	 have
heard	the	door	banging	shut.	Bless	her.
The	 durbar	 was	 dark	 and	 the	 guards	 were	 sprawled	 on	 the	 floor,	 fast
asleep.	One	was	snoring.	I	kicked	him	in	the	ribs	and	he	scrambled	up	with	a
curse.	Then,	seeing	me,	he	blinked	like	an	owl	for	a	few	minutes.	Recognition
finally	 dawned	 and	 he	 promptly	 fell	 at	 my	 feet.	 I	 did	 not	 have	 time	 for	 his
antics	so	I	kicked	him	again.	He	ran	out	and	the	other	buffoons	also	awoke	and
ran.	I	stood	in	the	dark	till	my	ministers	arrived.	My	servants	had	not	lighted
the	lamps	or	torches	and	we	stood	in	the	centre	of	the	durbar	hall	as	the	idiots
ran	hither	thither	like	rats.	After	overturning	two	chairs	and	breaking	a	good
vase,	the	room	was	finally	set	and	the	assembly	began	in	earnest.
Prahastha,	 with	 his	 characteristic	 emotionless	 voice	 and	 precision	 of
thought,	managed	to	irritate	everyone.	He	advocated	the	beheading	of	the	rebel
the	next	morning,	in	the	main	market	place,	to	set	an	example	to	all	those	who
nurtured	 intentions	 of	 rising	 against	 the	 State.	 For	 once,	 I	 found	 myself	 in
agreement	 with	 Prahastha,	 but	 was	 unwilling	 to	 conclude	 the	 proceedings
immediately	after	his	speech.	No	one	stood	up	to	contradict	him.	I	saw	Maricha
fidgeting	 and	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 saying	 something.	 Vibhishana	 was
uncharacteristically	 silent	 and	 we	 were	 all	 spared	 the	 heavy	 dose	 of	 morality
and	 ethics	 which	 he	 usually	 shoved	 on	 us	 at	 every	 possible	 opportunity.	 He
must	have	been	gloating	over	the	fact	that	he	was	instrumental	in	capturing	the
rebel	and	did	not	want	to	lose	his	glory.	As	silence	ruled,	I	stood	up	to	say	that
the	execution	would	take	place	the	next	evening.	Prahastha	had	suggested	early
morning,	 so	 I	 felt	 good	 about	 contradicting	 him.	 Wearily,	 I	 dismissed	 the
meeting	and	returned	to	my	room.

My	wife	was	still	sleeping	and	a	silver	beam	of	moonlight	illuminated	her
face.	She	looked	so	angelic	and	innocent	that	I	was	moved	by	the	sheer	poetry
of	her	face.	I	had	a	sudden	urge	to	kiss	her.	I	sat	beside	her,	grabbed	her	face,
and	 kissed	 her	 on	 her	 lips.	 She	 mumbled	 something	 and	 turned	 on	 the	 other
side	and	continued	to	sleep.	Denied	again,	I	wanted	to	grab	her	by	her	hair	and
bang	her	head	to	pulp.	heer	l	But	then,	unknown	to	me,	in	the	past	four	months
of	 marriage,	 a	 seed	 of	 love	 had	 been	 planted	 inside	 my	 soul.	 Against	 my
wishes	 and	 determination,	 I	 found	 myself	 madly	 in	 love	 with	 my	 wife.	 I	 lay
down,	careful	not	to	touch	her,	and	started	thinking	about	Bhadra,	how	he	had
come	 back	 into	 my	 life,	 and	 then	 my	 thoughts	 drifted	 to	 my	 sister.	 She	 was
someone	 who	 had	 been	 denied	 everything	 in	 life.	 As	 a	 child,	 she	 had	 been
denied	every	comfort,	love	and	affection.	It	was	no	wonder	that	she	fell	into	the
trap	of	love.	I	had	cornered	the	lion’s	share	of	my	mother ’s	love.	Then,	when
we	 grew	up,	I	 had	been	so	much	 in	love	with	myself	and	my	ambition,	that	I
had	forgotten	to	even	acknowledge	my	sister ’s	existence.	She	had	always	been
a	lonely	child.	Not	beautiful	to	look	at,	a	dark	and	somewhat	plump	girl,	her
existence	had	 been	dreary	and	dull	until	suddenly	she	became	 the	princess	of
Lanka.	 Then	 there	 were	 many	 suitors.	 I	 had	 been	 so	 immersed	 in	 governing
that	I	had	not	kept	an	eye	on	her.	I	had	the	feeling	that	she	had	become	more
bubbly	 and	 happy,	 but	 put	 it	 down	 to	 her	 sudden	 elevation	 in	 status.	 Now	 I
understood	 why	 she	 appeared	 so	 happy.	 She	 was	 in	 love,	 or	 she	 believed	 she
was	 in	 love.	 Whether	 the	 feeling	 was	 reciprocated	 by	 that	 bastard,	 I	 did	 not
know.	How	daring	of	him,	to	court	the	King’s	sister	when	there	was	a	price	on
his	head.	Was	he	using	my	sister	as	a	bait?	I	would	ensure	he	paid	a	price	for
his	audacity.	Rudraka	will	have	a	good	time	tomorrow.
I	 kept	 tossing	 on	 my	 bed	 as	 sleep	 eluded	 me.	 Finally,	 giving	 up	 any
attempt	to	sleep,	I	got	up	to	perform	my	morning	chores.	My	wife	slept	without
a	worry	in	the	world.	I	envied	her	for	a	while	and	then	without	disturbing	her,	I
went	out	of	my	chambers.
My	ministers	were	waiting	for	me	when	I	reached	the	durbar.	I	was	late
and	I	hurried	to	my	throne.	I	could	feel	the	tension	in	the	air.	And	then	I	saw
her.	I	did	not	like	it.	I	did	not	like	it	a	bit.	Soorpanakha	was	standing	there,	hair
dishevelled,	eyes	red	and	sore,	in	an	angry	mood.	The	last	thing	I	wanted	was
emotional	 blackmail.	 I	 hated	 it	 when	 my	 governance	 became	 mixed	 with
personal	affairs.	I	was	in	a	no-win	situation	here.	I	was	sure	she	was	going	to
use	 all	 her	 tricks	 to	 persuade	 me	 to	 let	 her	 lover	 off	 the	 hook.	 I	 was	 already
angry	by	the	time	the	murmuring	settled	down	in	the	durbar.	I	looked	around

and	caught	Maricha’s	eye.	He	was	shaking	his	head	and	I	braced	for	the	worst.
Prahastha	sat	with	his	hands	crossed	at	his	chest,	his	determined	chin	up,	and	a
look	 of	 supreme	 arrogance	 and	 defiance	 in	 his	 face.	 Kumbha	 drooled	 in	 his
seat	 and	 Vibhishana	 was	 busy	 going	 through	 some	 palm	 leaves.	 All	 my
ministers	sat	in	various	postures	of	defiance.
“I	wish	to	marry	Vidyutjihva.”	There	was	perfect	silence	in	the	room	and
Soorpanakha	 came	 a	 few	 feet	 forward	 and	 looked	 me	 straight	 in	 the	 eye	 and
repeated,	“I	will	marry	him	and	you	can	have	him	hanged	after	that.	And	once
you	murder	him,	I	will	commit	sati	on	his	funeral	pyre.”
Inadvertently	 I	 flinched.	 The	 notion	 of	 an	 Asura	 woman	 committing	 the
custom	 of	 Deva	 widows,	 would	 have	 been	 shocking,	 even	 if	 she	 was	 not	 my
sister.	The	entire	clan	would	become	a	laughing	stock.	“Don’t	try	to	blackmail
me.”	I	shouted	at	the	top	of	my	voice.
Then	 she	 started	 behaving	 hysterically.	 She	 began	 hitting	 her	 head	 with
her	hands,	tearing	her	hair	and	screaming	at	the	top	of	her	voice.	It	was	quite	a
scene.	 I	 could	 see	 the	 servants	 and	 guards	 trying	 hard	 to	 stop	 laughing.	 I
became	pale	and	was	totally	clueless	as	how	to	handle	the	situation.	It	was	most
embarrassing.	 I	 looked	 at	 Maricha	 but	 he	 was	 concentrating	 hard	 on	 a	 small
spot	 on	 the	 opposite	 wall,	 studying	 it	 intently.	 Soorpanakha	 called	 me	 names
and	 dared	 me	 to	 bedarost	 embarhead	 her.	 The	 entire	 palace	 was	 silent	 except
for	 my	 sister ’s	 insane	 howls,	 screams	 and	 curses.	 I	 felt	 helpless,	 angry,	 tired
and	confused.	But	more	than	that,	I	felt	guilty	for	not	being	a	good	brother,	for
not	caring	enough	for	my	family,	for	separating	my	siblings	from	our	parents,
and	for	being	so	nakedly	ambitious.	I	knew	I	was	weakening	inside.
I	saw	Kumbha	rise	from	his	seat.	“Brother,	this	is	a	family	issue	and	we
should	deal	with	this	in	private,”	he	said	ponderously.	I	was	grateful	to	him	and
stood	 to	denote	the	dismissal	of	the	meeting.	Then	my	favourite	friend	stood
up.	 Prahastha,	 in	 his	 most	 pompous	 and	 grating	 voice,	 said,	 “Your	 Highness,
this	is	no	longer	a	family	issue.	This	concerns	the	entire	Asura	kingdom.	This
is	 about	 an	 enemy	 of	 the	 State	 and	 how	 firmly	 we	 deal	 with	 terrorism	 and
treason.	This	is	about	the	future	of	a	nation.	The	fact	that	the	rebel	is	a	lover	of
the	King’s	sister,	does	not	change	anything.	Rather.	.	.”
I	 cut	 him	 short	 with	 a	 grunt	 and	 then	 exploded,	 “Stop	 your	 lecture,
Prahastha.	I	know	what	it	is	and	how	important	it	is	to	our	race	and	civilization.
But	have	some	patience	and	pity	on	the	poor	girl.	.	.”	My	voice	trailed	off.	Had
I	become	so	weak	that	I	had	to	ask	for	pity	from	my	own	minister?
“I	 do	 not	 have	 anything	 to	 say	 in	 private.	 I	 want	 to	 be	 hanged	 by	 this

heartless	monster.”	Soorpanakha	started	screeching	again.
Prahastha	 stood	 up,	 bowed	 and	 left.	 One	 by	 one,	 all	 my	 ministers	 left,
except	 Maricha,	 Vibhishana	 and	 Kumbha.	 I	 sat	 on	 my	 throne	 with	 my	 head
buried	in	my	hands.	A	splitting	ache	had	started	throbbing	deep	inside	my	head.
Maricha	 came	 near	 me,	 patted	 me	 on	 my	 shoulders	 and	 asked	 me	 to	 take	 a
decision	 according	 to	 my	 conscience.	 From	 there	 things	 went	 out	 of	 my
control.	Vibhishana	and	Kumbakarna	argued	that	nothing	was	more	important
than	 our	 sister ’s	 happiness.	 They	 insisted	 that	 if	 we	 could	 not	 make	 our	 own
sister	happy,	the	kingdom	was	not	worth	it.	I	wanted	to	protest	that	I	could	not
let	a	man	accused	of	treason	go	unpunished,	just	because	my	sister	wanted	him.
I,	as	King,	could	not	set	a	bad	example.	I	had	many	arguments	why	Vidyutjihva
needed	 to	 hang	 but	 I	 am	 ashamed	 to	 say,	 I	 kept	 quiet.	 I	 allowed	 them	 to
convince	 me	 that	 Soorpanakha	 needed	 to	 be	 married	 off	 to	 her	 lover.	 So,
against	 my	 better	 judgment,	 against	 my	 minister ’s	 advice,	 against	 what	 was
right,	moral,	ethical,	and	even	practical	wisdom,	I	allowed	my	sister	to	marry
the	 enemy.	 I	 retired	 to	 my	 chambers,	 a	 broken	 man,	 leaving	 Vibhishana	 to
convey	the	news	to	my	sister.

25	A	little	worm
Bhadra
It	had	been	six	months	since	Vidyutjihva	had	become	Ravana’s	brother-inlaw.	My	life,	as	usual,	continued	to	be	miserable.	I	could	not	show	my	face	in
the	palace	since	Vidyutjihva	would	have	ensured	my	death.	I	was	also	not	sure
about	 Ravana.	 Now	 that	 they	 had	 become	 relatives,	 I	 did	 not	 know	 what	 my
position	was.	I	hid	in	the	forest	for	a	few	days	and	when	hunger	chased	me	out
of	hiding,	I	tentatively	came	out	to	the	streets.	For	a	few	weeks	I	lived	in	mortal
fear	 of	 getting	 caught.	 Every	 time	 I	 saw	 a	 soldier	 or	 heard	 the	 noise	 of	 the
police	chariots	rumbling	through	the	streets,	I	hid.	Then	slowly	my	fear	ebbed.
I	was	too	small	for	kings	and	the	relatives	of	kings	to	be	bothered	about	me.
After	 a	 few	 more	 weeks	 of	 loitering	 about	 the	 streets,	 I	 moved	 in	 with
Mala.	At	first	she	was	glum	and	did	not	want	to	have	anything	to	do	with	me.
The	 entire	 revolutionary	 cadre	 had	 been	 dismantled	 with	 the	 disillusioned
idealists	 returning	 to	 the	 villages	 on	 the	 mainland	 and	 the	 opportunists,	 who
were	 the	 majority,	 joining	 Ravana’s	 army	 and	 holding	 positions	 of	 power.
Mala	was	a	subject	of	ridicule	as	hedaros	anytr	hero	lover	had	left	her	for	the
dark	and	ugly	princess.	On	the	first	day	she	did	not	allow	me	inside	her	house
and	 abused	 me.	 I	 grinned	 as	 I	 knew	 I	 had	 won.	 Finally,	 at	 midnight,	 I	 was
allowed	in	and	I	had	a	real	meal	after	months.	Then	we	made	love	and	slept,	but
in	the	morning	she	was	sour	again.	I	ignored	her	mood	and	kept	humming	that
old	Asura	folk	song	which	I	knew	irritated	her.	The	song	was	about	a	plump,
dark	 Asura	 girl	 who	 chased	 every	 man	 in	 town.	 It	 was	 a	 rowdy	 song	 and	 I
paused	 and	 rolled	 and	 cooed	 at	 the	 appropriate	 places	 to	 make	 sure	 she
understood	who	the	heroine	of	the	song	was.	She	went	out	after	showering	me
with	more	abuse,	but	nothing	could	dampen	my	mood	for	many	days	to	come.
That	was	until	I	found	out	that	she	was	meeting	her	old	lover	on	the	sly.

I	was	so	mad	with	the	slut	that	I	wanted	to	murder	her	the	night	I	found	out
about	her	trysts.	Instead,	I	ended	up	between	her	legs	panting	and	puffing.	I	was
angry	with	myself	for	being	manipulated,	angry	with	her	for	treating	me	like
this	and	I	plotted	revenge.	With	each	thrust,	I	imagined	my	dagger	piercing	that
man’s	bowels.	She	pushed	me	back	with	contempt	and	went	outside	the	hut	to
wash	 herself	 near	 the	 well.	 The	 image	 of	 her	 standing	 stark	 naked	 in	 the
moonlight	made	me	feel	weak	but	I	turned	and	closed	my	eyes.	I	could	hear	her
coming	 into	 the	 room,	 but	 I	 did	 not	 turn.	 I	 could	 feel	 her	 naked	 body	 beside
me,	 but	 her	 contempt	 erected	 a	 wall	 thicker	 than	 that	 of	 any	 fort.	 I	 wanted	 to
turn	and	grab	her,	but	I	could	not.	I	lay	there	with	my	heart	beating	furiously,
my	 thoughts	 of	 erotic	 adventures	 mixed	 with	 physical	 violence,	 anger	 mixed
with	 lust,	 and	 a	 hundred	 other	 emotions,	 all	 coiled	 together	 like	 cobras.	 I
developed	 a	 headache	 and	 lay	 there	 helpless	 and	 naked,	 with	 the	 growing
realization	 that	 I	 was	 nothing	 but	 an	 impotent	 worm	 in	 the	 greater	 order	 of
things	in	this	big,	bad	world.
When	 I	 woke,	 I	 felt	 irritable.	 I	 stood	 up	 lazily	 with	 a	 towel	 around	 my
waist	and	walked	towards	the	well.	I	could	smell	the	toddy	on	my	body	and	I
was	disgusted	with	everything.	I	stood	for	a	long	time	gazing	at	the	reflection
of	my	black	face	in	the	glistening	well	water.	I	wanted	to	jump	in	and	end	it	all.
But	there	was	only	two	feet	of	water.	Slowly,	a	plan	formed	in	my	mind.	I	had
to	meet	Ravana	somehow.
I	came	back	to	my	room	and	dressed	to	go	out.	My	crumpled	dhothi	smelt
but	I	did	not	have	a	spare	one.	I	looked	like	a	beggar.	I	combed	my	hair	with
my	hands	and	put	ashes	on	my	forehead.	Then	I	walked	towards	the	palace.	By
the	time	I	reached	the	main	gate,	there	was	a	huge	crowd	outside.	I	was	curious
about	 the	 commotion.	 Lots	 of	 sweet	 vendors	 and	 groundnut	 sellers	 were
moving	 about	 among	 the	 general	 hustle	 and	 bustle	 and	 a	 gang	 of	 teenagers
were	trying	to	break	into	the	crowd.	I	asked	one	tall,	black,	bony	young	man
what	the	matter	was.
“You	don’t	know?”	His	large	eyes	bulged	in	surprise.
“Hell!	How	should	I	know?”
“It’s	alright,	you	are	too	old	and	so	you	need	not	bother.”	he	said.
I	 was	 irritated.	 I	 was	 only	 thirty-five,	 but	 perhaps,	 to	 a	 man	 of	 nineteen,
anyone	 above	 twenty	 was	 an	 old	 man.	 Hiding	 my	 irritation	 as	 best	 I	 could,	 I
asked	him,	“What	are	those	buffoons	fighting	about?”
“You	old	rascal,	we	are	all	going	to	become	soldiers	of	our	Emperor.”
“Emperor,	 what	 Emperor?”	 I	 stopped	 in	 mid-sentence.	 Perhaps	 the	 king

had	promoted	himself.	I	was	alright	with	Emperor	or	Maharaja	or	whatever,	as
long	as	he	did	not	bother	me.
“The	Emperor	needs	a	large	standing	army,	which	is	why	he	needs	idiots
like	you.”	I	could	not	for	my	life	imagine	what	this	lanky	child	was	going	to	do
in	the	army.
“By	 Shiva,	 you	 are	 really	 a	 country	 bumpkicoue	 you.n,	 uncle,”	 his
companions	 snickered.	 “Our	 Emperor	 is	 planning	 to	 attack	 north	 India.	 We
Asuras	are	going	to	have	our	revenge.	We	will	teach	the	Deva	bastards	a	lesson
they	will	never	forget.”
Almost	 at	 the	 same	 moment	 an	 electrifying	 thrill	 swept	 through	 the
crowd.	And	huge	cry	rose	in	waves.	I	could	see	a	tall,	glittering	figure	on	the
top	 balcony	 of	 the	 palace.	 Cries	 of	 “Long	 live	 our	 Emperor!	 Victory	 to	 the
Asuras!	Death	to	Devas!”	rang	through	the	crowd.	Bejewelled	and	bewitching,
the	tall	figure	of	Ravana,	with	his	sword	drawn,	shouted	“Har	Har	Mahadev!
Hail	 Shiva!”	 And	 the	 crowd	 picked	 it	 up.	 Cries	 of	 Har	 Har	 Mahedev	 rang
through	 the	 crowd.	 The	 crowd	 swelled	 and	 I	 was	 almost	 in	 the	 middle	 now.
Soon	another,	more	attractive	figure,	joined	Ravana.	The	spectacularly	dressed
Vidyutjihva,	joined	his	brother-in-law	on	the	balcony.	He	was	followed	by	the
portly	 Kumbakarna,	 and	 relatively	 diminutive	 Vibhishana.	 Then	 one	 by	 one,
Ravana’s	 commanders	and	ministers	joined	the	Emperor	 on	the	 balcony.	 The
crowd	was	 in	a	frenzy.	Drums	were	 beaten.	The	sounds	 of	chenda	 and	 timila
created	 a	 huge	 din	 and	 the	 atmosphere	 was	 electric.	 Battle	 horns	 blared	 and
conches	were	blown.
I	was	thrilled.	The	secret	wish	I	had	nurtured	in	my	heart,	revenge	on	the
Devas	 who	 had	 shattered	 my	 little	 daughter ’s	 head	 and	 raped	 my	 wife,
possessed	me.	This	was	the	moment	I	had	waited	for.	I	cried	at	the	top	of	my
voice,	 “Har	 Har	 Mahadev!	 Death	 to	 the	 Devas!	 Death	 to	 Indra!	 Victory	 to
Maheswara!”	I	was	joined	by	many	and	I	soon	became	the	caller	for	a	group	of
about	 fifty,	 who	 repeated	 whatever	 I	 said,	 with	 much	 energy	 and	 enthusiasm.
The	portly	Asura	closest	to	me,	tried	to	outshout	me	but	a	well	directed,	secret,
kick	 on	 his	 foot,	 silenced	 him	 for	 the	 day	 and	 my	 leadership	 was	 ensured,	 at
least	 for	 the	 moment.	 Vidyutjihva	 tried	 to	 say	 something	 but	 nothing	 spoken
from	the	balcony	reached	the	crowd.
Many	small	circles	had	formed	in	the	huge	crowd	and	each	group	tried	to
create	the	maximum	noise.	A	few	fought	each	other,	but	the	general	enthusiasm
was	 unbeatable.	 This	 went	 on	 for	 more	 than	 an	 hour.	 The	 sun	 was	 almost
overhead	 and	 thousands	 of	 black	 bodies	 glistened.	 The	 smells	 assaulted	 my

senses	as	did	the	heat	and	humidity.	A	sore	throat	bothered	me	but	I	kept	up	the
cries,	lest	someone	else	take	over	the	mantle.	Then	suddenly,	a	hush	fell	over
the	crowd.	The	dignitaries	had	left	the	balcony	as	the	sun’s	rays	now	beat	down
mercilessly.	 They	 had	 retired	 to	 their	 cool	 chambers	 inside.	 Someone	 in	 the
rear	picked	up	the	cry,	once	more	hailing	Shiva.	I	could	see	men	on	horseback
entering	the	crowd.	There	was	a	big	stir	near	the	horses	and	food	packets	were
thrown.	Thousands	of	black	hands	went	up	to	catch	them.	I	too	pushed	forward
and	fought	my	way	through	to	get	a	food	packet.	It	turned	out	to	be	stale	meat,
some	 rice	 and	 a	 very	 spicy	 fish	 curry,	 wrapped	 in	 dried	 banana	 leaves.	 I
gobbled	 it	 up.	 By	 late	 afternoon,	 the	 crowd	 dispersed,	 leaving	 the	 palace
grounds	littered	with	banana	leaves,	fish	bones	and	food	crumbs.
I	walked	along	the	main	street	thinking	about	a	way	to	get	into	the	palace.
The	lanky	Asura	and	his	other	teenage	friends	were	sitting	on	the	steps	leading
to	 the	 Shiva	 temple	 and	 ogling	 the	 girls	 passing	 by.	 Such	 an	 uncomplicated
life!	The	lanky	teenager	waved	to	me	and	as	I	had	nothing	better	to	do,	I	moved
towards	him.	He	swept	the	step	near	him	with	his	hand,	sending	a	puff	of	dust
flying,	and	motioned	to	me	to	sit	down.	I	walked	to	the	boiled-peanuts	vendor
under	 the	 Banyan	 tree	 and	 used	 my	 last	 change	 to	 buy	 a	 handful	 of	 steaming
peanuts,	 wrapped	 artistically	 in	 plantcalthe	 Bain	 leaves	 and	 then	 went	 and	 sat
with	 the	 teenager,	 offering	 my	 peanuts	 to	 the	 gang.	 They	 passed	 around	 the
packet	and	by	the	time	it	reached	me,	only	a	few	nuts	were	left.
“I	 thought	 they	 were	 going	 to	 war	 today.”	 I	 said	 nonchalantly,	 and	 the
teenagers	 burst	 out	 laughing	 as	 if	 I	 had	 told	 them	 a	 great	 joke.	 I	 grinned
tentatively	and	the	lanky	teenager	slapped	my	back.	I	grinned	wider.
“This	has	been	going	on	for	the	past	few	weeks.	Even	we	are	impatient.
We	just	want	to	go	out	and	beat	the	Devas.”	the	boy	said	casually.
“They	 say	 the	 Deva	 girls	 are	 very	 beautiful.”	 An	 ugly	 Asura	 boy	 with
protruding	teeth,	added	with	some	hope.
“Oh	 they	 have	 fair	 complexions	 and	 breasts	 like	 mangoes,”	 another
Asura	boy	stated	dreamily.
“But	they	smell	like	rats.”	said	another	intellectual-looking	boy.
“Oh	 you	 have	 smelt	 them	 then?”	 asked	 my	 lanky	 one,	 and	 everyone
laughed.
“But	 why	 do	 you	 want	 to	 join	 the	 army?	 Do	 you	 have	 any	 personal
grudges	against	the	Devas?”	The	question	I	asked	sounded	stupid,	even	to	me.
“They	 have	 killed	 lots	 of	 Asuras,	 haven’t	 they?	 They	 destroyed	 our
temples.	 They	 do	 not	 respect	 Shiva,	 do	 they?”	 The	 boys	 looked	 rather

confused.
“My	mother	says	the	Devas	have	horns	and	also	tails.	They	hide	the	tails
in	their	dhothi	folds.”
“Old	women’s	tales,”	the	intellectual	one	hissed,	“they	are	just	uncivilized
barbarians.”
“I	suppose	you	people	just	want	to	roam	the	world.”	I	said.
“Ah,	but	we	will	die	for	our	race.”	The	lanky	one	stood	up	with	his	fist
clenched	 and	added	 dramatically,	“Our	bodies	for	the	earth,	our	lives	 for	the
Asura	race.”	The	other	boys	cheered	and	continued	chatting	animatedly.
I	envied	their	youth	and	innocence.	I	feared	what	war	would	bring	to	these
poor	children.	What	 do	 these	 simpletons	 know	 of	 war?	 I	 felt	 very	 old	 next	 to
them.	I	felt	I	did	not	belong.	I	was	too	grown	up	for	my	own	good.	I	sat	there
for	 a	 long	 time	 and	 when	 the	 sun	 slid	 behind	 the	 tall	 coconut	 palms	 and	 the
evening	 sea	 breeze	 caressed	 my	 tired	 body,	 I	 wearily	 slipped	 out	 of	 the
chattering	gang	and	made	my	way	home.
Wafts	 of	 evening	 prayers	 and	 the	 jingle	 of	 temple	 bells	 mixed	 with	 the
jingle	of	bangles	of	pretty	girls	moving	up	the	temple	steps.	There	was	an	air
of	gaiety	and	life	brimming	over	from	all	sides.	Yet,	I	felt	a	cold	fear	that	this
beautiful	evening	would	fade	away	like	the	mist.	I	was	mortally	afraid	of	what
the	 darkness	 would	 hold	 when	 it	 emerged	 from	 the	 folds	 of	 the	 mist.	 I	 could
discern	the	faint	smell	of	blood	and	smell	war	and	death.	But	above	all,	I	could
smell	a	terrible	treachery	and	decay.	The	dream	of	our	poor,	blasted	race,	had
begun	to	turn	sour.
I	 dragged	 my	 feet	 to	 the	 palace	 and	 requested	 an	 audience	 with	 the
Emperor	himself.	The	portly	gatekeeper	looked	as	if	I	had	escaped	from	a	mad
house	and	promptly	shoved	me	out.	I	waited	outside	in	the	garden	surrounding
the	palace,	under	an	Ashoka	tree,	hoping	the	Emperor	would	see	me	from	his
balcony	or	window,	and	grant	me	audience.	This	just	proved	that	I	had	yet	to
learn	 my	 lessons.	 I	 slept	 under	 that	 thick	 tree	 that	 night,	 and	 in	 the	 early
morning,	 when	 it	 rained,	 I	 walked	 back	 to	 my	 hut.	 Then	 in	 the	 evening,	 I
walked	back	and	waited	under	the	Ashoka	tree	again.

26	The	untouchable	king
Ravana

t	 size="-1">The	 day	 faded	 slowly.	 It	 was	 so	 hot	 that
the	island	was	like	a	damp	cloth	just	washed	in	hot	water.
I	 was	 tense	 and	 nervous.	 The	 preparations	 for	 war	 had
been	 going	 on	 for	 the	 past	 few	 weeks.	 It	 was	 a	 sort	 of
pilgrimage	 for	 me.	 I	 had	 never	 crossed	 the	 Narmada,
except	for	a	brief	trip	to	the	Himalayas	through	the	forest
trails	 and	 I	 was	 eager	 to	 see	 the	 legendry	 cities	 on	 the
banks	 of	 the	 Saraswathi	 and	 Indus,	 which	 the	 Asura
civilization	had	built	at	its	peak.	Not	that	much	remained
standing	 now.	 The	 rising	 tides	 of	 the	 Indus,	 the	 slow
drying	 up	 of	 Saraswathi,	 sieges	 and	 raids,	 had	 turned
those	 cities	 into	 the	 biggest	 graveyard	 of	 our	 race	 and
civilization.
An	 entire	 civilization	 and	 its	 people	 had	 been	 crushed	 and	 their	 spirit
annihilated.	 A	 great	 race	 had	 been	 taught	 to	 think	 of	 themselves	 as	 inferior
creatures,	 to	 hate	 the	 colour	 of	 their	 skin	 and	 believe	 that	 fairness	 was
equivalent	 to	 greatness.	 But	 now,	 the	 time	 of	 reckoning	 had	 come.	 From	 a
remote	island	on	the	southern	tip	of	this	vast	land,	a	man	with	no	royal	blood
or	great	ancestry,	a	half-bred	Asura,	was	going	to	claim	the	lost	lands	of	an	old
civilization.	I	felt	the	thrill	in	my	veins.	It	was	a	new	dawn.	When	history	spoke
of	Ravana,	it	would	be	with	awe	and	pride,	about	a	man	who,	against	all	odds

of	poverty	and	opposition,	led	a	spiritually	crushed	and	vanquished	people	to
glory.	 By	 Shiva,	 the	 Asuras	 would	 rule	 this	 vast	 country	 again.	 That	 is	 if
everything	worked	according	to	plan.
I	 entered	 my	 private	 chamber	 and	 spread	 out	 the	 cloth	 with	 the	 handpainted	 map	 of	 the	 sub-continent.	 If	 I	 had	 to	 begin	 an	 attack,	 I	 would	 have	 to
follow	 the	 eastern	 coastline,	 smashing	 the	 smaller	 Asura	 kingdoms	 and	 then
reaching	Alakapuri.	My	step-brother	held	fort	there	and	he,	with	his	genius	for
business,	had	rebuilt	his	business	empire.	Now	his	ships	sailed	east	instead	of
west	and	he	chose	to	avoid	the	islands	altogether.	And	he	was	once	again	one
of	the	richest	men	in	the	world.	To	fund	my	campaigns,	I	would	have	to	loot
my	brother	once	again.
But,	more	than	funding	or	war	plans,	what	worried	me	was	the	fate	of	my
little	one.	Her	birth	was	difficult	and	we	did	not	dare	hope	she	would	survive.
When	I	held	her	little,	tiny	body	in	my	hands,	hardened	by	years	of	warfare,	I
felt	 deeply	 content.	 I	 felt	 I	 owned	 the	 whole	 world	 and	 nothing	 else	 mattered
during	 the	 hours	 I	 spent	 watching	 my	 wife	 cooing	 to	 the	 baby,	 feeding	 and
bathing	 her.	 I	 could	 have	 gone	 on	 with	 that	 life	 for	 ever.	 But	 then	 one	 day,
everything	changed.	An	astrologer,	who	claimed	to	be	my	father's	friend,	came
to	the	palace,	looked	at	my	daughter	and	proclaimed	in	front	of	everyone,	that
she	 would	 bring	 destruction	 to	 the	 Asuras.	 From	 that	 day	 onwards,	 all	 my
family	 members,	 the	 palace	 servants,	 my	 ministers,	 began	 to	 behave	 in	 a
strange	fashion.	They	showed	great	reverence	and	love	when	my	daughter	was
in	my	arms	or	with	Mandodari.	But	I	could	feel	the	hatred	and	fear	they	felt	for
her.	 The	 Asuras	 were	 always	 so	 superstitious.	 I	 was	 afraid	 to	 commence	 a
campaign	leaving	my	daughter	behind.	She	was	hardly	a	few	weeks	old	and	the
Asuras	 were	 capable	 of	 anything.	 I	 feared	 for	 her	 life.	 It	 would	 be	 hard	 to
convince	Mandodari	to	allow	me	to	take	my	daughter	along.	But	I	would	find	a
way.	It	was	ridiculous	to	carry	an	infant	into	war	camps,	but	it	was	better	than
having	her	poisoned	or	stabbed	while	I	was	busy	building	my	empire.	I	could
keep	a	watch	if	she	was	with	me.	Perhaps	I	could	ask	Bhadra	to	keep	an	eye	on
her.	But	could	I	trust	him?
Ideally,	a	small	army	of	dedicated	troops	would	have	been	a	better	bet	and
more	effective	if	our	small	group	could	strike	repeatedly	like	lightning	in	the
night	and	vanish.	That	way,	we	could	break	the	peace	and	morale	of	the	enemy.
Only	Karthiveerarjuna,	on	the	west	coast,	and	Bali,	in	central	India,	would	be
dangerous	for	a	small	army.	Their	kingdoms	spread	away	from	the	sea	and	we
would	have	to	undertake	pitched	battles	inland.	The	swamps	of	the	ms	spread

he	 Narmada	 were	 too	 shallow	 for	 the	 bigger	 ships	 of	 the	 Asura	 navy	 and
reaching	the	rugged	middle	India	on	foot,	through	thick	shrub	forests,	would
be	tricky.	But	smashing	the	barbarian	Deva	tribes	of	the	Gangetic	plains	might
not	be	such	a	problem.
I	 was	 about	 to	 retire	 when,	 in	 the	 dying	 light,	 I	 saw	 a	 lonely	 figure
limping	 slowly	 away	 from	 the	 palace.	 There	 was	 an	 odd	 familiarity	 to	 the
small,	dark	figure.	A	sudden	flash	of	lightning	lit	up	the	entire	area	as	if	it	was
daylight	and	I	clearly	saw	the	figure	as	it	looked	up	in	fear.	Bhadra!	The	fellow
never	seemed	to	die.	I	did	not	know	what	feelings	surged	 through	me,	 was	it
relief	or	hatred	or	pity?	But	then,	why	did	I	call	my	page	and	ask	him	to	bring
the	man	into	my	chamber	at	that	godforsaken	hour?
Bhadra

The	siege	of	Alakapuri	was	the	bloodiest	battle	I	had	ever	fought	in.	By
the	time	we	reached	Kubera’s	kingdom,	the	Asura	ranks	had	swollen	to	a	few
lakhs	and	the	ravaging	army	left	many	smoking	villages	and	fallen	cities	in	its
trail.	 By	 then,	 over	 sixty	 small	 and	 large	 kings	 and	 tribal	 chieftains	 had
accepted	Ravana’s	suzerainty	and	joined	the	victorious	army.	In	many	cities	the
Brahmins	 were	 hunted	 down	 and	 hanged.	 The	 idols	 of	 Vishnu	 were	 smashed
and	 trampled	 upon	 and	 the	 Shiva	 lingam,	 installed	 in	 their	 place.	 It	 was	 a
restoration	of	Asura	pride.	It	electrified	the	whole	country	which	rose	as	one
against	the	Deva	oppressors.	Ravana	led	from	the	front	with	inspiring	bravery
which	at	times	bordered	on	dare-devilry	or	outright	foolhardiness.	But	nothing
inspired	Asuras	more	than	a	leader	who	was	contemptuous	of	death.
Soon	 suicidal	 squads	 stormed	 the	 smaller	 forts	 and	 captured	 them	 one
after	 the	 other,	 sometimes	 with	 boring	 ease	 but	 at	 other	 times,	 after	 bloody,
pitched	 battles.	 Prahastha,	 Rudraka,	 Vajradhamstra,	 Maricha,	 Vidyutjihva,
Kumbakarna,	 Dhumraksha	 –	 were	 all	 Asura	 heroes	 making	 a	 name	 for
themselves	 through	 their	 ruthless	 execution	 of	 Ravana’s	 strategies.	 They
thought	 nothing	 of	 the	 loss	 of	 a	 few	 thousand	 Devas	 or	 Asuras.	 They	 sought
glory	 and	 achieved	 it	 through	 blood	 and	 gore.	 A	 few	 dead	 Asura	 boys	 were
incidental	and	inconsequential.	The	lanky	Asura	lad	who	had	been	so	eager	to
participate	 in	 the	 war,	 was	 dead	 within	 the	 first	 hour	 of	 the	 attack	 on	 a	 petty
south	 Indian	 kingdom	 on	 the	 west	 coast.	 I	 had	 a	 strange	 desire	 to	 touch	 his

headless	 torso,	 but	 before	 I	 could	 move,	 whatever	 remained	 of	 his	 body	 was
trampled	under	the	marching	elephants.
Finally,	 the	 army	 halted	 on	 the	 outskirts	 of	 Kubera’s	 capital,	 Alakapuri.
Our	army	camped	in	the	farms	outside	the	city	and	we	looted	the	countryside
for	provisions	and	meat,	and	needless	to	say,	we	did	not	spare	any	woman.	The
countryside	 was	 fertile	 and	 rich,	 the	 men	 strong,	 and	 the	 women	 lovely	 and
doe-eyed.	 So	 it	 gave	 us	 great	 pleasure	 to	 slay	 the	 men	 and	 take	 the	 women.
Sometimes	I	felt	we	were	no	different	from	the	rampaging	Deva	army	which
had	 trampled	 my	 village.	 But	 then,	 peer	 pressure	 is	 something	 which	 even
great	men	find	hard	to	resist.	It	was	easier	to	succumb	to	temptation	than	raise
oneself	 to	 the	 chivalrous	 act	 usually	 heard	 about	 only	 in	 legends	 and	 fairy
tales.	After	all,	they	were	just	Devas	and	deserved	to	be	hated,	irrespective	of
their	social	standing.	Like	any	other	Asura,	I	too	was	quite	sure	of	that.
We	 were	 getting	 desperate.	 It	 had	 been	 more	 than	 two	 months	 now	 and
there	was	no	sign	of	Kubera	surrendering.	The	monsoon	was	approaching	and
we	had	stripped	the	entire	countryside	of	everything	it	could	offer.	It	was	then
that	Prahastha	saw	stray	dogs	emerge	from	a	hole	in	the	ground,	a	few	hundred
metres	into	the	jungle.	Intrigued,	he	kept	a	watch	at	the	spot	and	was	surprised
to	find	that	at	dead	of	night,	men	with	supplies	removed	somes	a	fe	earth	and
entered	 a	 secret	 chamber.	 Prahastha	 returned	 to	 the	 camp	 with	 the	 news	 and
soon	 half	 our	 army	 was	 busy	 digging.	 Within	 minutes	 we	 found	 a	 huge,
circular,	 iron	 door.	 We	 prised	 it	 open	 and	 one	 by	 one,	 thousands	 of	 soldiers
entered	the	secret	corridor	which	led	to	the	fort.
I	 was	 among	 the	 first	 brave	 fools	 to	 enter.	 We	 took	 Kubera’s	 army	 by
surprise.	They	fought	well	but	our	army	had	swarmed	the	fort	from	all	sides.
We	inched	forward	until	finally,	when	the	first	rays	of	sun	streaked	across	the
eastern	sky,	Kubera’s	army	was	either	butchered	or	had	fled.	When	we	reached
Kubera’s	chamber,	it	was	on	fire.	We	cheered,	thinking	the	King	was	dead,	but
Prahastha,	 after	 examining	 the	 scene,	 declared	 that	 it	 was	 just	 a	 ruse	 and	 the
King	had	escaped.	Then	we	found	another	secret	chamber	leading	to	the	jungle,
but	we	were	too	late.	Kubera	had	got	away.
Hoofprints	 pointed	 to	 where	 the	 King	 had	 mounted	 his	 horse	 and
galloped	away.	Our	sentries	searched	the	countryside	but	they	were	in	no	mood
to	continue	as	their	colleagues	were	busy	looting	the	palace.	The	treasures	we
plundered	from	Alakapuri	helped	swell	Ravana’s	ranks.
After	the	fall	of	Alakapuri,	things	went	back	to	the	routine.	We	smashed
and	 ruined	 Deva	 kingdoms;	 burnt	 Vishnu	 temples;	 erected	 Shiva	 temples

wherever	 possible;	 and	 religiously	 followed	 all	 the	 usual	 itineraries	 of	 war
such	as	arson	and	rape.	We	dragged	Brahmins	out	and	sent	them	to	Vaikunta,
the	 Deva	 heaven	 and	 abode	 of	 Vishnu.	 It	 was	 amusing	 to	 see	 them	 quiver	 in
fear	and	curse	us.	When	they	saw	their	curses	only	drew	derisive	laughter,	they
prayed	 to	 Vishnu,	 then	 to	 Shiva,	 and	 finally	 fell	 at	 our	 feet	 to	 beg	 for	 their
lives.	Needless	to	say,	we	butchered	them	and	took	their	women.
By	the	time	we	reached	the	petty	kingdom	of	Ayodhya,	on	the	banks	of	the
River	 Sarayu,	 the	 monsoon	 ended.	 The	 river	 swirled	 black	 with	 rage.	 At	 a
distance,	we	could	see	a	few	hutments	and	rundown	buildings	with	a	torn	flag
flying.	It	had	the	emblem	of	the	rising	sun,	but	going	by	its	condition,	it	would
have	been	more	appropriate	to	call	it	the	city	of	the	setting	sun.	Ravana	sent	a
messenger	to	Anarnya,	King	of	Ayodhya,	asking	him	to	surrender.	But	six	days
passed	and	there	was	still	no	reply.	Impatient,	Ravana	ordered	us	to	cross	the
river	and	attack	the	city.	But	what	a	shock	awaited	us	when	we	entered	the	city.
Of	all	the	places	I	had	seen,	this	was	surely	the	worst.	The	streets	were	filthy
and	urchins	ran	around	naked.	Flies	buzzed	over	the	rotting	carcasses	of	street
dogs.	 Pigs	 fed	 on	 refuse.	 People	 lived	 on	 the	 road,	 pissed	 and	 relieved	 their
bowels	 where	 they	 lived.	 The	 streets	 were	 narrow	 and	 winding.	 It	 was	 a	 dust
bowl.	Had	it	not	been	on	our	way,	it	would	not	have	been	worth	entering	this
hole.	There	was	nothing	here	to	plunder.	There	was	no	defending	army	to	greet
us.	Instead,	a	swarm	of	beggars	with	outstretched	arms	rushed	to	meet	us.	We
were	 confused	 and	 dug	 through	 our	 pockets	 for	 some	 change.	 Our	 army
marched	through	the	narrow	streets	with	urchins	cheering	us	and	semi-naked
women	 staring.	 When	 we	 reached	 the	 palace	 gates,	 there	 were	 only	 two	 old
guards.	The	gate	was	made	of	rotting	wood	and	the	guard	carefully	pushed	it
open	and	allowed	the	invading	army	in.
Vidyutjihva	 was	 our	 Commander	 and	 he	 handed	 over	 the	 palm	 leaf
reiterating	 Ravana’s	 command	 to	 King	 Anarnya	 to	 surrender.	 The	 geriatric
who	appeared	to	be	the	head	of	Ayodhya’s	army,	stared	at	the	letter	for	a	long
time.	 I	 could	 see	 Vidyutjihva	 getting	 tense.	 Then	 I	 realized	 that	 the	 enemy
captain	was	holding	the	letter	upside	down,	staring	at	it	and	then	at	us,	time	and
again.
“The	 fellow	 does	 not	 know	 how	 to	 read.”	 the	 soldier	 near	 me	 sneered
derisively.
“What	is	this?”	the	old	captain	asked	Vidyutjihva	in	a	feeble	voice.
“Just	go	to	your	king	and	say	that	the	Asura	army	has	come	to	his	town.
come	totowely.

“The	King	is	at	his	prayers.”	The	old	captain	blinked	a	few	times.
“Ask	 the	 buffoon	 to	 get	 here	 right	 now.”	 Vidyutjihva	 sounded	 almost
desperate.
“Yes,	 yes.	 .	 .sir,	 but	 the	 King	 is	 praying.”	 The	 old	 captain	 looked	 at
Vidyutjihva	condescendingly	and	spelt	each	word	as	if	talking	to	a	dim-witted
child,	and	added	for	good	measure,	“If	you	have	an	appeal,	you	should	come
tomorrow.	Today	is	Tuesday	and	the	King	is	praying.”
The	situation	had	become	comical	and	we	were	all	laughing	when	Ravana
entered.	He	jumped	off	his	horse	and	asked	the	old	captain	for	his	King.	The
old	captain	was	having	a	bad	day	for	sure.	He	had	just	tried	to	convince	a	dimwitted	chap	about	the	impossibility	of	seeing	his	King	on	a	prayer	day,	when
yet	another	came	along	asking	the	same	thing.	But	Ravana	was	not	a	man	for
niceties.	He	pushed	aside	the	captain	and	walked	into	the	fort,	unsheathing	his
sword	at	the	same	time.	All	of	us	followed.
After	the	luxurious	palaces	of	Lanka	and	Alakapuri,	it	was	a	shock	to	see
this	 dilapidated	 palace.	 Floors	 crumbed	 under	 our	 shoes,	 pillars	 were	 motheaten,	curtains	dusty,	and	there	were	holes	in	the	roof.	An	old	man	sat	crosslegged	before	an	idol	of	Vishnu,	mumbling.	Ravana	waited	for	a	few	moments
and	then	tapped	the	old	man’s	shoulder.	For	a	few	seconds,	nothing	happened.
Then	 slowly,	 the	 old	 man	 turned	 and	 stood	 up	 falteringly.	 Ravana	 extended	 a
supporting	hand	to	the	old	king	but	he	shook	off	Ravana’s	hand	and	shouted	in
a	voice	that	belied	his	age,“Do	not	pollute	me,	you	untouchable	Shudra.”
We	 were	 shocked.	 A	 mighty	 king,	 who	 now	 had	 suzerainty	 over	 almost
half	 the	 known	 world,	 stood	 facing	 a	 frail,	 old	 man,	 who	 shamelessly	 called
himself	a	king	of	a	dilapidated	town.	Instead	of	cowering	in	fear,	the	old	man
had	commanded	the	other	not	to	pollute	him.	I	stared	at	my	King.	He	was	taken
aback	for	a	moment	and	mumbled	something	which	sounded	suspiciously	like
my	father,	he	is	also	a	Brahmin.
“You	 untouchable,	 if	 your	 mother	 is	 casteless,	 so	 too	 are	 you.”	 The	 old
man	was	almost	shouting.
Anger	 flared	 in	 Ravana’s	 eyes	 and	 he	 got	 hold	 of	 the	 old	 man	 by	 his
throat	and	pressed	the	blade	of	his	sword	to	the	nape	of	his	neck.	“I	don’t	want
to	kill	an	old	man	who	cannot	fight.	Surrender	and	I	shall	spare	your	life.”
“I	will	not	surrender	to	a	Shudhra.”
“I	 am	 not	 a	 Shudhra,	 I	 am	 an	 Asura.”	 Ravana	 almost	 pleaded.	 The	 old
king	laughed	derisively.“Then	fight	us,	you	old	rascal,”	Ravana	bellowed.
“I	will	not	demean	myself	by	fighting	a	Shudhra.”

“Then	die	at	the	hands	of	a	Shudhra.”	Ravana	roared.
“You	 Shudhra,	 I	 curse	 you	 in	 the	 name	 of	 Vishnu.	 My	 descendants	 will
take	 revenge	 for	 polluting	 me.	 They	 will	 destroy	 your	 city,	 your	 clan,	 the
honour	of	your	wives,	your	sons,	you.	.	.”	With	a	clean	sweep	Ravana	cut	off
the	 head	 of	 Anarnya,	 King	 of	 Ayodhya.	 He	 held	 the	 severed	 head	 of	 the	 old
king	above	the	idol	of	Vishnu.	Blood	dripped	from	the	head	and	flowed	onto
the	head	of	the	idol.
“Scourge	 Vishnu,	 drink	 the	 blood	 of	 your	 devotee.“	 He	 kicked	 the	 head
like	 a	 ball	 and	 it	 landed	 with	 a	 dull	 thud	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 idol.	 The	 blood
soaked	lips	of	Vishnu	smiled	mockingly	at	the	Emperor.	With	a	mighty	blow
using	the	hilt	of	his	sword,	Ravana	broke	open	the	head	of	Vishnu.
As	 if	 on	 cue,	 the	 army	 fell	 on	 the	 small	 temple	 of	 the	 dead	 king	 and
demolished	 it	 methodically.	 We	 found	 rubies	 hidden	 inside	 the	 idol	 and	 the
garlands	 that	 decorated	 the	 idol,	 were	 made	 of	 pure	 gold,	 studded	 with
diamonds.	The	dead	King’s	insult,	that	our	mere	touch	would	pollute	his	body,
kept	us	enraged	enough	to	plunder	the	de	pluecorated	ad	Gods	and	their	buxom
consorts.	But,	in	some	corner	of	my	heart,	a	monster	clung	tenaciously	with	its
piercing	tentacles.	It	was	the	Emperor	mumbling,	almost	apologetically,	to	the
Deva	 king,	 that	 he,	 Ravana,	 the	 mighty	 Emperor	 and	 saviour	 of	 Asuras,	 also
had	a	Brahmin	father.

27	Love	at	last
Ravana
I	left	the	dilapidated	palace	for	my	army	to	plunder.	There	wasn’t	much	to
plunder	except	the	old	temple	in	the	palace.	While	his	subjects	died	of	hunger,
their	 king	 was	 decorating	 his	 God	 with	 rubies	 and	 diamonds.	 And	 the	 rascal
had	the	nerve	to	say	that	my	touch	would	pollute	him.	But	then,	why	did	I	try	to
seek	 his	 approval	 by	 saying	 that	 my	 father	 was	 a	 Brahmin?	 I	 wanted	 to	 kick
myself	for	that.	What	did	that	mean?	Was	there	a	racist	devil	lurking	inside	me?
Or	was	I	uncomfortable	with	my	Asura	identity?	Prahastha,	in	his	one	of	those
professorial	 moods,	 might	 have	 said	 it	 was	 because	 I	 still	 yearned	 for	 my
father ’s	 love.	 I	 hated	 my	 father	 and	 all	 that	 he	 represented.	 I	 hated	 the
Brahmins,	 the	 Devas	 and	 their	 culture	 or	 the	 lack	 of	 it.	 I	 hoped	 no	 one	 had
heard.	I	was	their	leader.	These	poor	people	had	left	their	homes,	their	wives,
children	and	old	parents,	to	follow	me	in	my	quest	for	glory.	And	what	did	I
give	them	in	return?	I	ought	to	have	been	ashamed.	Never	again,	never	again
would	I	consider	myself	a	Brahmin.	I	hated	my	fair	skin.	I	hated	my	height.	I
was	 an	 Asura,	 the	 proud	 inheritor	 of	 Mahabali,	 Hiranya,	 Hiranyaksha,	 and
scores	of	mighty	Emperors	who	had	shaped	Indian	civilization.
People	 moved	 away	 from	 me	 as	 I	 passed	 through	 the	 market	 place.	 I
thought	at	first	that	it	was	due	to	the	respect	accorded	to	a	conquering	Emperor,
but	then	I	realized	it	was	because	I	was	a	Shudhra.	I	was	polluting	their	grand
city.	 Even	 the	 sight	 of	 us	 was	 polluting.	 I	 saw	 Brahmins	 in	 filthy	 clothes,
thumping	 their	 walking	 sticks	 sharply	 on	 the	 ground	 to	 drive	 away	 any
polluting	 castes.	 People	 conducted	 their	 business	 in	 the	 market	 place	 with
elaborate	 rituals	 so	 no	 one	 would	 touch	 or	 pollute	 each	 other.	 But	 they	 also
spat	 red	 pan	 juice	 all	 over	 the	 street	 and	 walked	 over	 it.	 People	 openly
defecated	 but	 were	 still	 scrupulous	 about	 not	 touching	 each	 other.	 Had	 it	 not

been	so	pathetic	and	ironical,	it	would	have	been	comical.	Some	culture	this!	I
thought	that	the	burden	of	civilizing	these	people	had	fallen	on	our	shoulders.
If	I	did	not	stop	this	nonsense,	this	extreme	form	of	caste	practise	would	spread
throughout	India.	And	if	it	did,	we	could	say	goodbye	to	our	freedom.
A	few	of	my	soldiers	were	busy	looting	the	shops	and	I	did	not	have	the
heart	to	stop	them.	After	all,	they	were	only	taking	what	was	originally	stolen
from	 our	 people.	 The	 irony	 was	 that	 the	 natives	 were	 more	 afraid	 of	 being
touched	 by	 the	 Asuras	 than	 of	 being	 killed.	 It	 was	 truly	 an	 area	 of	 darkness.
Another	strange	thing	I	noticed	was	that	there	were	fewer	women	than	men	on
the	 streets.	 And	 they	 were	 veiled	 and	 did	 not	 look	 the	 men	 in	 the	 eye.	 They
walked	 with	 their	 eyes	 fixed	 on	 their	 dusty	 feet.	 I	 had	 never	 seen	 such
submissive	 women	 in	 my	 life.	 This	 was	 a	 different	 culture,	 an	 exotic
civilization	which	was	centuries	behind	anything	I	had	seen	in	any	kingdoms	of
the	Asura,	Vanara,	Yaksha	or	Nagas.
I	had	had	enough	of	Ayodhya	and	rode	back	to	the	palace,	which	looked
even	more	desolate	after	the	looting.	Some	members	of	the	royal	family	had
escaped	 to	 the	 neighbouring	 jungles	 and	 Vajradhamstra	 asked	 for	 orders	 to
follow	 and	 kill	 them.	 I	 ordered	 the	 army	 to	 leave	 this	 place	 and	 forget	 about
petty	kings	and	their	pale,	ghostly	wives.	According	to	Prahastha,	that	was	bad
strategy,	 to	 let	 the	 members	 of	 a	 conquered	 palace	 escape	 with	 their	 life
without	a	proper	es	a	their	ptreaty	or	their	accepting	to	be	our	subjects.	I	did
not	 have	 the	 time	 nor	 the	 inclination	 to	 check	 the	 veracity	 of	 such	 quixotic
theories	so	I	overruled	him	and	we	continued	our	eastward	march.
Our	army	marched	out	of	Ayodhya	and	I	promptly	forgot	the	name	along
with	 the	 other	 north	 Indian	 dustbins	 our	 army	 had	 marched	 through.	 Later,
much	 later,	 a	 prince	 from	 this	 miserable	 place	 would	 turn	 my	 world	 upside
down.	 Perhaps,	 had	 I	 followed	 Prahastha’s	 advice	 and	 hunted	 down	 the	 royal
family	 and	 finished	 them	 off,	 things	 would	 have	 been	 different.	 Maybe,	 our
race	 would	 have	 been	 saved;	 our	 country	 retrieved	 from	 the	 clutches	 of	 a
religion	 which	 discriminated	 against	 its	 own	 people.	 I	 was	 quite	 sure	 this
darkness	 from	 the	 north	 would	 spread	 over	 my	 beloved	 country,	 splitting
people,	not	by	language	or	race	or	affluence,	but	by	the	subjective	views	of	a
set	of	Brahmins	who	decided	what	was	pure	and	impure.	But	who	could	predict
such	things	then?	I	had	crushed	so	many	kingdoms,	so	many	princes,	any	one
from	those	hundreds	could	have	been	my	enemy.	Or	perhaps,	I	was	not	a	good
king.	I	never	went	by	the	book.	People	who	played	by	the	rules	did	not	commit
such	silly	mistakes,	even	if	they	did	not	come	as	far	as	I	had.

After	a	day’s	journey,	we	came	to	a	small	village	market	place	bordering
the	jungles	belonging	to	a	tiny	Deva	kingdom	called	Mithila.	I	was	bored	with
the	whole	expedition.	Unlike	western	and	southern	India,	the	villages	in	these
parts	were	desperately	poor.	There	were	no	big	cities	to	plunder.	There	were
no	 majestic	 Shiva	 temples.	 There	 were	 only	 old	 wrinkled	 Brahmins	 who
terrorised	the	people	and	followed	a	rigid	caste	system.	We	wanted	to	go	back
to	the	balmy	heat	of	the	south.	The	ocean	beckoned	us.	But	I	wanted	to	find	a
way	back	through	the	eastern	seashore	to	Mahabalipuram	and	then	to	Lanka.
I	was	taking	a	well	deserved	nap	when	a	scuffle	outside	my	camp	awoke
me.	I	went	out	and	stopped	dead	in	my	tracks.	There	were	four	or	five	Asuras
trying	 to	 grab	 a	 woman.	 I	 was	 furious.	 Taking	 a	 girl	 was	 accepted	 when	 you
had	conquered	a	city	after	a	bloody	war,	especially	if	she	was	a	Deva	girl.	But
there	was	a	line.	Where	were	my	bodyguards?	And	then	I	saw	them	among	the
Asuras	fighting	for	the	lady.
“Leave	her!”	I	bellowed.	Three	of	the	Asuras,	including	one	wallowing	in
the	 mud,	 scrambled	 up	 and	 ran	 away.	 The	 other	 two	 vanished	 when	 they	 saw
me	unsheathe	my	sword.	It	was	then	that	I	noticed	the	quarry	over	whom	they
had	 been	 fighting.	 Her	 veil	 had	 fallen	 from	 her	 face.	 And	 what	 a	 face	 it	 was.
Dark	eyes	burned	like	fire,	deep	curved	lashes	gave	her	an	innocent	look.	Her
lips	were	full	and	red	under	a	small	straight	and	sharp	nose.	Curly,	dark	hair
fell	 onto	 her	 forehead.	 Her	 skin	 without	 blemish	 and	 a	 pout	 gave	 her	 a	 coy
look.	I	stared	at	her.	My	eyes	became	transfixed	on	a	small	mole	on	the	right
cleft	 of	 her	 deep	 cleavage.	 She	 had	 full	 breasts	 and	 a	 flat	 stomach.	 I	 saw	 her
blush	 as	 she	 recognized	 the	 passion	 in	 my	 roving	 eyes.	 She	 was	 the	 fairest
woman	I	had	ever	seen.	She	exuded	feminine	charm	and	softness.	I	wanted	her.
She	 adjusted	 her	 dress	 and	 I	 averted	 my	 eyes.	 Even	 though	 I	 had	 never
stopped	anyone	from	raping	or	taking	any	women	when	our	army	conquered	a
city,	I	myself	had	never	done	anything	of	the	sort.	It	was	against	my	upbringing
and	 I	 ensured	 that	 children	 and	 old	 people	 were	 spared	 from	 abuse.	 But	 I
wanted	 her.	 It	 was	 not	 like	 the	 acquired	 taste	 I	 had	 developed	 for	 my	 wife,
Mandodari,	whom	I	had	almost	forgotten	now.	Was	it	desire	at	first	sight?	This
woman	generated	an	animal	passion	in	me.	I	moved	towards	her	and	grabbed
her	 wrists.	 She	 pulled	 her	 arm	 back	 and	 I	 tried	 to	 grab	 her	 again.	 Then	 she
slapped	me	hard.	Right	across	my	face.	My	cheek	stung.	I	was	shocked.	When	I
grabbed	her	again,	she	promptly	slapped	me	again,	this	time	causing	my	nose
to	 bleed.	 She	 was	 one	 spirited	 lady.	 I	 turned	 as	 though	 giving	 up,	 but	 then
quickly	 spun	 round	 and	 liftound	 anded	 her	 off	 the	 ground.	 Ignoring	 her

scratches	 and	 screams,	 I	 carried	 her	 into	 my	 tent.	 I	 was	 angry,	 but	 more	 than
that,	 I	 wanted	 her.	 I	 threw	 her	 onto	 the	 bed	 and	 when	 she	 tried	 to	 get	 away,	 I
slapped	her	across	her	face.	She	spat	at	me.	I	grabbed	the	silk	sheet	and	tied	her
hands	 and	 legs	 and	 bundled	 her	 onto	 the	 bed,	 suffering	 three	 more	 bites	 and
numerous	scratches.
Then,	puffing	and	panting,	I	fell	into	the	nearest	chair.	She	was	lying	with
her	 back	 to	 me;	 her	 rounded	 hip	 again	 stirred	 waves	 of	 passion	 in	 me.	 Her
waist	was	bared	and	I	wanted	to	kiss	the	folds.	Her	thighs	were	shapely.	I	just
wanted	to	run	my	fingers	over	her	soft,	fair	skin.	I	imagined	her	naked	in	my
arms	and	slapped	the	arm	of	the	chair	in	anger	and	frustration.	‘Why	won’t	she
have	me?	I	am	the	Emperor	of	India.	The	mighty	Asura	king,	Ravana.’
After	 a	 few	 moments	 silence,	 I	 tried	 to	 turn	 her	 towards	 me.	 “What	 is
your	name?”	I	asked	her	and	immediately	felt	stupid.	She	slowly	turned	up	her
face,	 her	 curly,	 black	 hair	 making	 designs	 on	 her	 forehead.	 Her	 eyes	 bored
through	me	and	I	was	afraid.	A	shiver	went	down	my	spine.	‘This	is	a	historic
and	fateful	moment	on	which	my	fate	and	that	of	my	race	and	my	country	hung.’
I	shook	off	the	idiotic	thought	and	recalled	my	anger.
“Do	you	require	a	girl’s	biography,	before	you	rape	her?”	she	asked.
I	 didn’t	 know	 what	 to	 say.	 A	 corner	 of	 my	 mind	 found	 something
humorous	in	the	statement	and	I	wanted	to	laugh.	But	then,	I	foolishly	stood	up,
lost	 for	 words,	 not	 knowing	 what	 to	 say.	 I	 coughed,	 stammered,	 and	 moved
away	from	her.
“Once	 you	 have	 finished	 with	 me,	 please	 leave	 me	 alive	 for	 a	 few
minutes.	 I	 want	 to	 see	 your	 king,	 Ravana,	 the	 great	 Asura,”	 with	 these	 words
she	spat	on	the	ground.
“But..	I	am	Ravana.”	my	voice	trailed	off.
An	 animal	 cry	 rose	 from	 her.	 I	 was	 startled.	 How	 could	 such	 a	 lovely
creature	 make	 such	 a	 hideous	 sound?	 She	 was	 struggling	 to	 free	 herself	 but
finally	 gave	 up	 and	 dissolved	 into	 fits	 of	 sobbing.	 I	 stood	 watching	 from	 a
distance.	After	some	time,	I	moved	near	her.	I	wanted	to	touch	her	but	my	hands
trembled	as	I	hesitated	and	then	slowly	put	an	arm	on	her	shoulder.	She	stirred
and	looked	at	me	with	hatred.	I	withdrew	my	hand.
“Do	 you	 know	 how	 a	 Deva	 widow	 lives?”	 she	 asked	 in	 a	 whimper.	 I
remained	silent.	“Do	you	know	the	choices	a	Deva	widow	has…	How	should
you	know?	You	are	the	conqueror.	Why	should	a	few	lives	bother	you.	.	.?”
I	 was	 moved	 beyond	 myself.	 But	 I	 was	 from	 a	 different	 culture.	 I	 had
heard	of	the	plight	of	Deva	women	but	it	was	so	horrible	that	I	had	thought	they

were	stories	spun	by	the	Asura	or	Naga	spin	doctors	to	discredit	the	Devas.
“Your	people	killed	my	husband.	He	was	a	poor	man.	.	.	a	Brahmin	who
did	no	one	any	wrong.	.	.	Why	did	your	people	kill	him?”
I	was	stung.	‘What	was	I	doing	with	a	Brahmin	widow?	Was	it	because	she
was	a	Brahmin	that	I	was	attracted	to	her?	Did	her	fair	skin	trigger	the	lust	in
me?’	I	felt	disgusted	with	 myself.	But	then,	I	had	known	she	was	a	high-born
Brahmin	woman	the	moment	I	saw	her.	Why	did	I	choose	to	be	shocked	when
she	spelt	out	her	lineage?
“We	 can	 live	 a	 slave&apos;s	 life	 in	 the	 house	 of	 our	 inlaws…	 with	 our
heads	 shaven…	 hands	 and	 throats	 unadorned…	 purposefully	 made
unattractive…	a	living	corpse…	no	bindis	for	us…	no	bangles…	no	coloured
saris…	only	coarse	white…	no	life…	an	unpaid	servant…	a	living	corpse…	”
I	 was	 moved.	 I	 could	 not	 imagine	 such	 a	 life	 for	 an	 Asura	 wor	 an
Asuman.	 If	 the	 husband	 died,	 she	 would	 mourn	 for	 a	 decent	 period	 and	 then
find	another	life	partner	and	move	on	with	her	life.
“You	 are	 a	 mighty	 King…ha….	 You	 know	 I	 could	 jump	 into	 my
husband’s	 funeral	 pyre	 and	 become	 a	 Goddess…	 the	 virtuous	 sati.	 Then	 the
same	 people	 who	 would	 have	 treated	 me	 no	 better	 than	 an	 animal	 in	 life…
would	erect	temples	and	worship	me.”
“What	 is	 your	 name?”	 I	 asked	 her.	 I	 moved	 closer	 and	 lifted	 her	 chin.
Tears	swelled	in	the	dark	eyes	and	made	them	glitter.	I	saw	my	own	reflection,
so	 small	 that	 I	 felt	 my	 own	 insignificance.	 She	 stared	 for	 a	 long	 time	 at	 my
face.	Finally,	the	hint	of	a	smile	lit	up	her	face.	I	dissolved.
“Vedavathi.”	she	said	simply	and	I	promptly	fell	head	over	heels	in	love
with	this	Deva	Brahmin	girl.

28	An	asura	princess
Bhadra
When	the	guard	shook	me	from	sleep,	I	cursed	him	and	his	forefathers.
He	 prodded	 me	 with	 the	 blunt	 end	 of	 his	 spear	 and	 told	 me	 that	 the	 Prime
Minister	wanted	to	see	me,	so	would	I	please	pull	up	my	dhothi	and	get	going?
I	felt	heavy	from	the	previous	night’s	drinking	binge	and	was	not	in	the	mood
for	barrack	humour.	I	cursed	him	again	and	tied	my	dhothi	tightly	and	washed
my	face	in	the	sluggish	stream	nearby.	I	smelt	of	country	liquor	so	I	gargled
once	more	and	dragged	myself	to	the	prime	minister ’s	camp.	Why	was	I	being
summoned?	The	last	few	months	had	only	brought	disaster	on	our	race.	Most
of	 the	 camp	 was	 thoroughly	 disillusioned	 with	 this	 campaign.	 We	 had	 been
camping	 in	 the	 forest	 across	 the	 river	 Narmada,	 eating	 wild	 berries	 and	 the
occasional	monkeys	that	were	foolish	enough	to	stray	near	our	camp,	drinking
badly	brewed	liquor,	and	waiting	endlessly	for	some	action.
The	 wise	 men,	 the	 great	 men,	 the	 royals,	 like	 Prahastha	 and	 the	 others,
were	 huddled	 together,	 talking	 in	 whispers.	 But	 our	 great	 King,	 the	 mighty
Ravana,	had	it	coming.	He	was	busy	wooing	an	adamant	Brahmin	girl	without
a	 thought	 for	 all	 the	 fools	 who	 had	 started	 with	 him	 on	 this	 campaign.	 He
refused	to	meet	his	ministers,	stopped	his	inspections	of	the	ranks,	and	even	his
inspirational	speeches.	She	would	sit	cross-legged	near	the	river,	meditating	or
sometimes	 vehemently	 cursing	 the	 Asura	 King	 for	 what	 he	 had	 done	 to	 her
people.	The	King,	like	a	love-struck	teenager,	would	coo	nonsense	to	her	and
grovel	 before	 her,	 pleading	 for	 her	 love.	 He	 had	 even	 forgotten	 the	 little
daughter	he	was	carrying	along	and	not	even	the	hungry	cries	of	the	little	one
aroused	Ravana	from	his	love	stupor.	The	Brahmin	lady	was	immune	to	all	his
charms	and	this	made	the	King	desperate.	Why	he	did	not	take	her	forcibly,	was
beyond	my	comprehension.

The	 campaign	 drifted	 on	 aimlessly,	 avoiding	 the	 bigger	 kingdoms,
mostly	 skirting	 jungles	 and	 occasionally	 raiding	 some	 village	 barns.	 Finally,
after	many	months	of	loitering,	we	reached	the	banks	of	the	mighty	Narmada,
when	our	King	decided	to	impress	Vedavathi	with	his	swimming	prowess.	He
stripped	 and	 entered	 the	 swiftly-flowing	 river,	 and	 got	 drawn	 into	 the	 strong
current.	 At	 least	 that	 was	 what	 the	 woman	 told	 the	 Council.	 Our	 mighty
Emperor	 had	 sent	 his	 bodyguards	 away,	 so	 no	 one	 else	 saw	 what	 exactly
happened.
A	few	days	later,	we	received	a	messenger	from	King	Karthiveerarjuna,
claiming	that	he	held	the	Asura	King	as	his	prisoner.	The	entire	army	was	held
to	ransom.	For	three	days	the	great	Asura	Council	was	shut	up	inside	the	Prime
Minister ’s	 camp,	 deliberating.	 In	 the	 meanwhile,	 the	 camp	 split	 into	 two.
Vidyutjihva’s	 followers	 spread	 rumours	 that	 Ravana	 was	 already	 dead.	 They
argued	that	it	was	better	to	return	to	Lanka.
The	 other	 group	 under	 Rudraka,	 proposed	 storming	 Karthiveerarjuna’s
stronghold	and	teaching	the	half-castes	a	lesson,	even	at	the	cost	of	our	King’s
life.	He	had	supporters	like	Sumali	and	Malyavan,	who	argued	that	Asura	pride
was	at	stake	and	an	all-out	war	with	a	decisive	outcome	was	needed.	Of	course,
these	were	only	speculations	started	by	guards	standing	outside	the	camp	where
the	Council	met.
All	the	great	men	were	seated	in	their	cushioned	chairs	when	I	entered	the
tent.	 I	 bowed	 low	 and	 kept	 my	 hand	 over	 my	 mouth,	 my	 eyes	 staring	 at	 the
floor,	my	spine	bent,	avoiding	any	eye	contact.	The	King’s	throne	stood	vacant
but	 Prahastha	 was	 seated	 just	 next	 to	 it.	 There	 was	 an	 uneasy	 silence.	 Then
Prahastha	 spoke,	 “Bhadra,	 we	 are	 assigning	 you	 a	 special	 task.	 We	 feel	 only
you	can	do	it.”
My	 heart	 jumped.	 ‘At	 last!	 Here	 was	 the	 moment	 I	 had	 been	 dreaming
about,	 a	 chance	 to	 become	 a	 hero,	 an	 opportunity	 to	 become	 a	 legend	 and
escape	 from	 the	 mundane.’	 It	 was	 not	 that	 I	 had	 always	 yearned	 to	 do
courageous	and	brave	deeds,	but	I	had	sometimes	wished	that	fate	would	give
me	 the	 chance	 of	 a	 lifetime	 to	 somehow	 save	 my	 King	 and	 become	 his
favourite	and	the	hero	of	the	entire	race.
“It	might	be	disgusting	but	you	have	to	do	it.”	Maricha	walked	up	to	me
and	put	a	comforting	hand	on	my	shoulder.	My	ears	burned.	‘What	were	these
people	 talking	 about?’	 The	 dreams	 of	 my	 heroism	 disintegrated	 in	 a	 million
pieces.	It	wasn’t	going	to	be	a	heroic	rescue	of	our	Asura	King.	That	would	be
done	by	these	nobles	surrounding	me.

The	 job	 is.	 .	 .”	 Maricha	 was	 finding	 it	 difficult	 to	 spell	 out.	 Vidyutjihva
moved	towards	me	menacingly	and	I	cowered.	I	wanted	to	stand	up	and	stare	at
his	 face,	 but	 my	 body	 remained	 bent.	 “You	 will	 take	 that	 Deva	 woman	 and
dispose	of	her.”	he	sneered.	“And	also	that	ill-fated	little	princess.”
I	recoiled	from	the	shock	of	what	I	heard.	I	had	never	liked	the	woman	but
our	 King	 loved	 her.	 I	 might	 not	 love	 Ravana	 but	 I	 stuck	 with	 him	 because	 I
believed	that	finally,	he	would	outrun	all	these	buffoons.	And	that	would	serve
my	purpose.	And	now,	when	he	was	in	danger,	perhaps	due	to	his	own	folly,	his
supposedly	good	friends	were	plotting	to	finish	off	his	love	and	his	little	baby
girl.
“Should	we	kill	her?	And	the	little	princess.	.	.“	Maricha	mumbled.
“Pshaw!“	 Vidyutjihva	 spat	 out.	 “We	 have	 had	 enough	 bad	 luck	 with	 the
King	 running	 around	 this	 woman	 shamelessly.	 And	 have	 you	 forgotten	 the
predictions?	That	little	girl	of	Ravana	is	an	ill	omen	to	the	entire	Asura	race.
She	 will	 bring	 death	 and	 destructions	 to	 us	 and	 our	 King	 thinks	 all	 these	 are
stupid	beliefs.	I	do	not	want	to	take	any	chances.”
“Enough!”	 Prahastha’s	 voice	 was	 calm	 and	 clear,	 which	 made	 it	 more
frightening.	 He	 looked	 uneasy	 and	 indecisive.	 “I	 need	 not	 tell	 you	 this	 but	 I
believe	that	knowing	the	reason	for	this	decision	will	help	you	do	your	duty	to
our	race,	with	a	clear	conscience.”
Maricha’s	 voice	 was	 barely	 audible,	 as	 if	 he	 had	 swallowed	 something
and	 was	 trying	 to	 talk	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 “Our	 war	 campaign	 has	 reached	 a
critical	 point.	 We	 are	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 a	 total	 rout.	 Our	 King	 has	 been	 taken
prisoner	 and	 we	 fear	 we	 will	 end	 up	 paying	 a	 king’s	 ransom	 to
Karthiveerarjuna.	Morale	is	low	among	the	troops	and	the	Council	has,	in	all
its	 wisdom,	taken	a	decision.	We	feel	that	the	lady	was	 a	major	distraction	 to
our	King.	I	won’t	go	to	the	extent	of	saying	she	is	a	spy	planted	by	the	Devas,
but	I	know	many	people	who	would	vouch	for	such	fantasr	such	ftic	theories.
Notwithstanding	the	veracity	of	such	conspiracy	theories,	there	is	no	doubt	that
she	has	become	a	millstone	around	the	neck	of	the	entire	Asura	race.”	Maricha
paused	 and	 looked	 intently	 at	 my	 face.	 I	 was	 sure	 he	 could	 sense	 my	 intense
hatred	towards	all	these	great	men.	He	sighed	and	put	his	hand	on	my	shoulder
as	he	towered	over	me.	I	felt	like	a	puppy	looking	up	his	master.
Prahastha	 moved	 towards	 me,	 then	 stooped	 from	 his	 great	 height	 and
whispered	darkly	in	my	ear,	“Take	her	and	dispose	of	her.”
Vidyutjihva	moved	nearer	and	hissed,	“And	do	not	forget	the	little	one.”
I	 stood	 still	 for	 some	 time	 and	 then,	 with	 the	 utter	 helplessness	 of	 the

lower	 class	 of	 Asuras,	 I	 bowed	 from	 the	 waist.	 ‘Your	 wishes	 are	 my	 orders,
Guru.’
I	was	dismissed	with	a	wave	of	the	hand	by	Prahastha	and	went	out	with	a
heavy	heart,	Vidyutjihva’s	jeer	burning	deep	within.	I	went	to	my	camp	and	fell
onto	 my	 ragged	 bed.	 I	 was	 tired	 of	 being	 a	 dog	 to	 these	 people.	 ‘Who	 gave
these	rascals	the	divine	right	to	ride	over	poor	people	like	me?’	I	felt	anger	and
indignation	rising	in	me,	but	then,	at	the	precise	moment	when	it	was	about	to
brim	 over,	 a	 soldier	 entered	 and	 put	 a	 plate	 full	 of	 delicacies	 on	 the	 floor
beside	me.	He	banged	down	a	metal	glass	and	poured	fine	wine.	I	sat	up	on	my
bed	and	watched	the	ritual	with	faint	interest.
“You	 grovelled	 before	 them	 did	 you?	 Well,	 you	 are	 being	 fed	 well,”	 he
sneered	and	left.
All	that	we	had	got	for	the	last	few	days	had	been	a	few	spoons	of	rice	and
a	watery	gruel.	There	was	never	enough.	But	for	the	important	ones,	there	was
always	enough	and	more.	When	you	did	what	they	wanted,	they	sometimes	fed
you	 a	 few	 morsels	 from	 their	 table.	 I	 stared	 at	 the	 plate	 for	 a	 long	 time.
Suddenly	I	felt	very	hungry.	I	wiped	my	hands	on	my	dhothi	and	eagerly	ate	my
special	treat.	For	good	measure,	I	licked	the	plate	as	well.	Then	in	one	sweep,	I
swallowed	the	fine	wine	and	threw	the	metal	tumbler	out.	It	landed	somewhere
in	the	darkness	outside	and	registered	its	protest	with	a	clang.
It	was	still	dark	when	I	was	shaken	awake	from	my	drunken	slumber.	I	had
a	searing	headache	and	hangover.	I	could	hear	the	noise	of	the	ox	cart	getting
ready.	 I	 went	 out	 and	 washed	 my	 face	 in	 cold	 water,	 shivered,	 and	 then
stretched.	 I	 could	 see	 the	 tall	 figure	 of	 Maricha	 approaching	 me.	 Quickly,	 I
went	 in	 and	 changed	 into	 some	 decent	 clothing.	 Then,	 fumbling	 with	 my
clothes,	I	went	out	to	meet	him	midway,	bowed,	and	remained	bent	at	the	waist.
He	was	in	a	dark,	pensive	mood.	He	silently	came	near	me,	stretched	out	a	hand
to	touch	me,	but	then	decided	against	it.	After	a	few	moments	silence,	he	said,
“Bhadra,	I’m	sorry	about	the	task	we	have	entrusted	to	you.	But	do	it	anyway,
for	our	race,	for	our	King.”
I	remained	silent.	Somewhere	a	cock	crowed	before	its	time.	“I	hope	what
we	are	doing	is	the	right	thing.	.	.	I	feel	sorry	for	the	girl.	.	.	and	of	course,	for
the	 Brahmin	 lady.	 Godspeed	 Bhadra.	 .	 .do	 your	 duty	 and	 do	 not	 trouble	 your
simple	 mind	 with	 anything.	 Leave	 the	 worrying	 to	 us.”	 And	 with	 a	 swirl,	 he
turned	on	his	heels	and	left.
I	stood	there	bent	for	a	few	more	moments.	‘Simple	mind	 indeed.’	 I	 felt
blood	on	my	hands.	When	I	stood	erect,	I	prayed	for	strength	and	inner	peace

and	waited	for	the	exhilaration	to	sweep	me,	knowing	that	I	was	doing	my	duty.
Nothing	came	to	me	except	a	sense	of	dread,	self-pity	and	disgust.	In	that	mood
I	 walked	 to	 the	 kitchen.	 The	 clerk	 at	 the	 counter	 smiled	 when	 he	 saw	 me	 and
handed	 over	 a	 bundle	 of	 food.	 The	 bustling	 activustling	 ity	 in	 the	 kitchen	 at
such	an	early	hour	surprised	me.	When	I	walked	back,	a	drizzle	had	started.	I
tossed	the	bundle	into	the	cart	and	climbed	onto	the	driver ’s	seat	and	waited.
The	east	had	streaks	of	light	when	they	brought	her.	She	was	drugged	and
being	carried	by	two	men.	Her	dress	has	become	dishevelled	and	a	large	part
of	 her	 white	 breasts	 were	 exposed.	 The	 men	 carrying	 her	 were	 ogling	 at	 the
rare	treat	and	sniggering.	They	dumped	her	in	the	back,	winked	at	me,	and	left.
After	some	time,	Maricha	came,	carrying	with	a	little	bundle	delicately	in	his
hands.	He	kissed	the	forehead	of	the	baby	 girl	and	slowly	deposited	her	near
the	woman.	He	turned	back,	trying	to	avoid	my	eyes.	I	saw	a	tear	drop	on	the
baby’s	 thighs.	 She	 stirred	 a	 little,	 smiled	 angelically	 in	 her	 sleep	 and	 was	 at
peace	with	herself.

I	 whipped	 the	 oxen	 and	 with	 a	 jerk	 the	 cart	 started	 its	 swaying	 journey.
The	 sun	 had	 already	 risen	 and	 painted	 the	 world	 saffron	 when	 I	 reached	 the
swelling	 Narmada.	 The	 drizzle	 had	 turned	 golden	 in	 the	 morning	 sunlight.
There	 was	 a	 huge	 rainbow	 on	 the	 distant	 horizon	 and	 I	 turned	 away	 from	 it.
The	cart	swayed	and	jerked	its	way	through	the	narrow	forest	path	towards	the
kingdom	of	the	Devas.	My	quarry	was	asleep	in	her	drug-induced	world.	The
beauty	of	the	forest	cheered	me	and	for	some	time	I	was	able	to	push	aside	my
dark	 thoughts.	 I	 enjoyed	 the	 cold	 drizzle	 on	 my	 face,	 the	 fragrant	 wind

caressing	my	skin	and	I	forgot	what	I	had	been	entrusted	to	do.	I	was	a	simpleminded	person,	wasn’t	I?
It	was	dark	and	the	sun	sinking	below	the	distant	hills	when	I	stopped	for	a
rest.	She	was	still	sleeping.	I	felt	the	stirrings	of	sexual	passion	arising	in	me.
Her	 breasts	 were	 still	 half	 exposed.	 I	 wanted	 to	 remove	 her	 dress	 completely
and	see	what	remained	hidden.	As	I	reached	a	trembling	hand	towards	her,	the
baby	 near	 her	 stirred.	 It	 jerked	 me	 back	 and	 I	 felt	 ashamed.	 Then	 the	 anger
came	back.	She	was	mine	to	do	with	as	I	pleased.	I	had	been	entrusted	with	her
disposal.	 I	 was	 surprised	 I	 had	 brought	 her	 so	 far.	 I	 could	 have	 gone	 a	 few
miles	away	and	finished	her	off	and	come	back	in	a	few	hours.	The	story	to	be
spread	was	that	we	had	been	taking	her	and	the	princess	to	a	village	doctor	a
few	miles	from	camp,	as	they	were	suffering	from	forest	fever,	but	both	had
succumbed	to	the	illness.
By	 now	 I	 was	 miles	 away	 from	 camp.	 Who	 would	 know	 if	 I	 had	 her?
Perhaps	the	Council	would	appreciate	my	act.	I	moved	again	and	had	my	hands
firmly	on	her	clothes.	I	tried	to	unknot	her	breast	cloth.	But	in	my	excitement	I
found	 it	 difficult.	 I	 had	 almost	 got	 through	 when	 she	 opened	 her	 eyes	 and
stared	at	me	like	a	cow.	I	cowered,	stopped	my	fumbling,	and	stood	up.	Tears
brimmed	 in	 her	 eyes	 and	 a	 small	 drop	 fell	 and	 wet	 the	 red	 silk	 cloth	 on	 the
floor	of	the	cart.	I	felt	ashamed	and	turned	my	face	away.	Then	she	howled	–	an
animal	cry	of	agony,	pain,	and	abandonment.	It	startled	the	birds	around.	The
little	oil	lamp	I	had	carried	had	toppled	over	and	spread	oil	stains	on	the	silk
sheet.	I	tried	to	put	it	upright	but	my	hands	were	trembling	in	fear.
“You	 uncouth	 Asura,”	 she	 screamed	 in	 a	 high	 pitched	 voice.	 ‘How	 dare
you	touch	me?”	The	baby	had	woken	up	and	started	wailing.
“Your	 master	 never	 even	 tried	 to	 touch	 me	 and	 you…scoundrel.	 How
dare	you?”
I	 had	 regained	 my	 anger.	 She	 was	 all	 alone	 in	 a	 forest	 and	 I	 had	 been
instructed	 to	 kill	 her.	 I	 moved	 towards	 her	 as	 she	 tried	 moving	 away.	 She
attempted	to	get	out	of	the	cart	but	the	flickering	oil	lamp	which	had	spread	oil
stains	 over	 her	 clothes,	 burst	 into	 life	 in	 the	 wind	 and	 her	 dress	 caught	 fire.
Instinctively,	 I	 tried	 to	 smother	 the	 fire	 but	 she	 slapped	 me	 hard	 and	 ran
towards	 the	 river,	 a	 ball	 of	 fire,	 screaming	 in	 pain	 and	 anger.	 She	 never
managed	to	reach	it.	I	ran	behind	her,	tbehind	hrying	to	catch	her,	if	possible
save	her.	She	screamed	and	screamed,	but	continued	burning.	She	had	fallen	a
few	feet	from	the	bank	and	was	beyond	any	help.	I	gave	up	trying	to	save	her.
After	all,	my	job	was	to	finish	her	off.	Yet,	she	refused	to	die	for	a	long	time.

Lying	there	near	the	river,	a	mass	of	half-burnt	flesh,	she	looked	ghastly.	She
kept	cursing	the	entire	Asura	clan.	She	screamed	that	Ravana	had	brought	her
to	this	and	that	she	would	return	in	the	next	life	to	haunt	him.	I	watched	her	die
with	an	indifference	bordering	on	boredom.	Before	she	died,	she	howled	that
she	would	enter	the	body	of	the	little	Asura	princess	as	a	spirit	and	ensure	that
the	 entire	 Asura	 clan	 was	 destroyed,	 and	 the	 prediction	 of	 that	 astrologer
would	 come	 true	 through	 her	 wrath,	 through	 her	 chastity	 and	 such	 nonsense.
Finally	she	died	when	the	sky	was	turning	faintly	red	in	the	east.
The	baby	had	stopped	crying.	I	ran	towards	the	cart.	She	looked	at	me	and
there	was	a	flicker	of	an	innocent	smile.	I	did	not	know	what	to	do	and	thought
of	 smashing	 her	 head	 on	 the	 nearest	 rock.	 Then	 I	 saw	 the	 image	 of	 a	 small
girl’s	skull	splattered	in	my	own	house	by	the	Devas.	Did	I	want	to	do	the	same
thing	 to	 this	 baby?	 I	 lifted	 her	 and	 her	 small	 fists	 tightened	 against	 my	 little
finger.	I	could	not.	I	could	not	at	all.	I	collapsed	with	 the	baby	in	my	lap	and
wept.
I	sat	there	for	a	long	time	and	drifted	off	to	sleep	with	the	baby	crying	in
my	lap,	until	other	sounds	woke	me	with	a	jolt.	A	large	hunting	party	appeared
–	I	saw	hundreds	of	armed	men	on	horses	and	on	foot.	They	were	erecting	a
camp	 in	 a	 clearing	 by	 the	 river.	 The	 baby	 lay	 limp	 and	 almost	 blue,	 perhaps
dead.	 I	 had	 to	 get	 away	 from	 here.	 The	 hunting	 party	 made	 enough	 noise	 to
wake	 a	 whole	 village	 and	 I	 was	 afraid	 the	 baby	 would	 awaken	 and	 cry.	 The
party	looked	like	Devas,	though	there	were	many	black-skinned	among	them.
The	last	thing	I	wanted	was	for	them	to	discover	the	dead	Brahmin	woman,	and
me	with	the	baby…	I	had	to	get	away.
But	when	I	turned	to	go,	I	tripped	and	fell	in	the	undergrowth.	The	baby
slipped	from	my	hands	and	rolled	a	few	feet	into	a	slime-covered	ditch	and	let
out	 a	 howl.	 To	 my	 horror,	 one	 of	 soldiers	 turned	 in	 our	 direction	 and	 I	 saw
him	alerting	the	others	and	pointing	in	our	direction.	They	came	towards	us	to
investigate.	I	had	clambered	up	a	big	Banyan	tree,	hoping	they	had	not	seen	me.
I	was	fortunate	that	the	guards	did	not	look	up.	I	saw	more	soldiers	coming	and
then	heard	a	distinct	cry	of	alarm.	They	had	found	the	dead	Brahmin	woman,
lying	burnt	near	the	river.	I	saw	one	of	them	running	towards	their	main	camp.
There	was	some	general	agitation	and	I	could	see	them	trying	to	get	the	baby
out	of	the	slime.	It	was	not	a	deep	ditch	but	the	baby	was	slowly	sinking.	The
soldiers	 knew	 that	 the	 moment	 they	 stepped	 into	 it,	 they	 would	 sink	 into	 the
quagmire.
A	squat	man	with	an	air	of	importance	came	and	the	entire	party	bowed	to

him	and	started	talking	in	excited	voices.	He	peered	into	the	ditch	and	ordered
one	of	his	minions	to	fetch	a	plough,	which	he	carefully	used	to	lift	the	baby
out	of	the	ditch.	He	felt	for	the	baby’s	heartbeat	and	on	his	orders,	his	servants
scattered	 to	 fetch	 various	 things.	 After	 a	 few	 minutes,	 the	 baby	 began	 to	 cry
again	 and	 everyone	 cheered.	 I	 also	 felt	 like	 cheering	 from	 the	 canopy	 of	 the
tree	 but	 held	 back	 the	 impulse.	 Hidden	 among	 the	 branches,	 I	 watched	 them
cremate	what	was	left	of	Vedavathi	and	learnt	from	their	conversations,	that	the
scholarly-looking	man	was	Janaka,	the	King	of	Mithila.
That	 afternoon,	 the	 men	 assembled	 about	 their	 King,	 and	 with	 Brahmin
priests	chanting,	the	King	bent	to	whisper	the	name	he	had	given	the	baby.	The
entire	camp	erupted	into	cheers	and	the	name	of	the	baby,	Sita	or	‘the	one	got
with	a	plough’,	filled	the	air.	I	was	happy	for	the	baby.	Instead	of	being	eaten	by
some	wild	animal,	she	would	now	be	a	princess	in	a	palace.	This	was	a	lucky
was	a	lbaby	and	I	hoped	she	would	carry	that	luck	through	her	entire	life.	She
was	 my	 master ’s	 daughter,	 a	 princess	 of	 Lanka,	 an	 Asura	 princess,	 but	 born
with	a	curse,	a	death	warrant	for	her	blasted	race.
Later,	after	their	partying	was	over	and	most	of	them	were	dead	drunk	or
asleep,	 I	 slipped	 down	 from	 tree	 and	 entered	 the	 camp	 quietly.	 I	 stole	 some
food	from	the	kitchen	and	drank	some	wine	from	the	half-empty	jugs	scattered
around.	 It	 was	 then	 that	 I	 had	 the	 irresistible	 urge	 to	 see	 the	 Asura	 princess
again.	 I	 entered	 the	 most	 luxurious	 looking	 camp	 and	 in	 the	 dim	 light	 of	 the
flickering	oil	lamp,	I	saw	the	little	bundle	snuggled	coyly	in	a	white	silk	sheet,
near	the	loudly	snoring	king.	I	went	close	to	her	and	peered	into	her	beautiful
face.	I	stooped	and	gently	planted	a	kiss	on	her	cheek.	Perhaps	the	vile	fumes
irritated	her,	because	she	pouted	and	then	sucked	her	lips	a	few	times.	I	stood
for	 a	 few	 minutes,	 watching	 her	 tiny	 hands	 and	 legs.	 Then,	 with	 great
reluctance,	I	slipped	away	from	the	camp,	tears	streaming	down	my	cheeks	and
my	legs	weak	with	emotion.
As	 I	 reached	 the	 clearing,	 I	 looked	 back	 once	 more.	 I	 felt	 I	 was	 leaving
my	 own	 daughter	 there	 and	 prayed	 to	 Shiva	 to	 keep	 her	 happy.	 I	 prayed	 she
would	 grow	 into	 a	 lovely	 princess	 and	 marry	 some	 good	 Deva	 prince	 who
would	 keep	 her	 happy	 forever.	 This	 King	 seemed	 to	 be	 a	 gentle	 sort	 and
learned	 and	 wise.	 As	 I	 walked	 back	 through	 the	 jungle	 to	 the	 Asura	 camp,	 I
wanted	to	take	her	back	and	adopt	her	as	my	own.	I	wanted	to	give	her	back	to
my	King	and	confess	the	truth.	I	wanted	to	do	many	things	but	I	was	confused.

When	 I	 was	 sufficiently	 far	 away	 to	 think	 clearly,	 it	 struck	 me.	 I	 should
have	 killed	 the	 baby.	 I	 shuddered	 at	 the	 thought,	 but	 had	 the	 premonition	 that
she	would	come	back	one	day.	She	would	return	to	her	clan	and	be	the	cause	of
the	destruction	of	everything	her	father	had	fought	for.	I	did	not	know	how	I
knew,	 but	 these	 thought	 kept	 coming	 back.	 I	 prayed	 to	 Shiva	 for	 deliverance,
but	deep	down	I	knew	that	even	Shiva	was	helpless.	Perhaps	that	would	be	her
revenge	–	the	revenge	of	an	Asura	princess	on	a	proud	and	heartless	race	that
wanted	her	dead	even	before	she	had	a	chance	to	know	life.	She	would	change
the	 history	 of	 mankind.	 But	 I	 am	 running	 ahead	 of	 myself.	 I	 doubt	 whether	 I
knew	 so	 much	 or	 was	 so	 clairvoyant	 then.	 All	 that	 would	 come	 later	 and
consume	 us	 all,	 condemning	 my	 country	 to	 darkness	 for	 many	 millennia	 to
come.

29	Let	her	live
Ravana
I	did	not	want	to	face	anyone.	Like	a	bull	in	a	market,	I	was	exchanged	for
goods.	My	people	bought	me	back	by	paying	whatever	we	had	gained	from	our
campaign.	 The	 humiliation	 was	 complete.	 In	 one	 stroke,	 Karthiveerarjuna
neutralized	my	army.	We	did	not	have	anything	to	take	back	to	Lanka.	We	had
to	 surrender	 all	 our	 arms,	 except	 our	 personal	 swords,	 the	 horses,	 the
elephants	 and	 the	 gold.	 And	 what	 we	 got	 in	 return	 was	 my	 worthless	 life.	 I
wanted	 to	 die,	 but	 then	 again,	 the	 entire	 sacrifice	 would	 have	 gone	 to	 waste.
What	was	even	sadder	was	that	I	could	not	put	up	a	fight.
Vedavathi	 challenged	 me	 to	 cross	 the	 swiftly	 flowing	 river	 and	 the	 fool
that	 I	 was,	 I	 dived	 into	 the	 ravaging	 Narmada.	 I	 felt	 like	 a	 teenager	 trying	 to
impress	 his	 girlfriend.	 But	 I	 underestimated	 the	 swiftness	 of	 the	 current.	 And
before	 I	 could	 recover	 from	 my	 ill-timed	 dive,	 my	 head	 hit	 an	 underground
rock.	I	almost	drowned	and	then	got	swept	away	by	the	current.	When	I	opened
my	eyes,	I	was	in	a	dungeon,	chained	to	an	iron	bed,	like	a	mad	man.	Initially,	I
was	angry	at	myself,	at	Vedavathi,	at	the	Asuras,	and	at	Karthiveerarjuna,	who	I
guessed	was	my	captor.	But	soon	anger	died	in	the	damp	dungeon.	When	the
door	 opened	 for	 the	 stale	 food	 which	 was	 thrown	 in,	 a	 glimmer	 of	 hope
gleamed.	 After	 a	 few	 days,	 even	 that	 died.	 I	 soon	 lost	 count	 of	 the	 days,	 the
time,	 and	 forgot	 even	 my	 ambition,	 dignity	 and	 pride.	 I	 was	 just	 a	 rat,
scurrying	around	the	dungeon	to	survive
They	had	unchained	me	after	a	few	days.	My	spirit	was	broken,	but	I	kept
myself	 sane	 by	 counting	 the	 footsteps	 of	 the	 guards	 outside.	 I	 tried	 to	 escape
and	 failed	 miserably.	 I	 was	 beaten	 by	 the	 lowly	 guards.	 I	 would	 not	 have
minded	 so	 much	 had	 Karthiveerarjuna	 come	 to	 supervise	 my	 torture.	 I	 had
practiced	 the	 words	 to	 shock	 him	 with.	 I	 wanted	 him	 to	 see	 I	 could	 endure

anything	and	that	my	spirit	could	never	be	conquered.	But	he	did	not	come	and
I	 think	 that	 hurt	 me	 more	 than	 anything	 else.	 I	 wept	 like	 a	 child	 in	 that	 dark
dungeon;	I	cried	for	my	lost	glories,	my	freedom,	my	ambitions.	Sometimes	I
thought	of	Lanka	and	my	almost-forgotten	wife,	Mandodari.	I	yearned	for	the
fragrance	of	ripe	mangoes.	I	relived	the	taste	of	yellow	jackfruit,	the	spray	of
water	from	the	gigantic	falls	of	the	Poorna,	near	Muzaris,	the	lapping	of	waves
on	the	white	sands,	the	swaying	of	coconut	palms	on	a	moonlit	night,	the	smell
of	jasmine.	.	.
Then	 one	 day,	 when	 all	 hope	 was	 dead,	 buried,	 and	 turned	 rotten	 deep
within	me,	the	door	to	the	outside	world	opened.	There	was	a	jeering	crowd	of
motley	 soldiers	 and	 the	 servants	 of	 Karthiveerarjuna	 lined	 up	 outside	 the
dungeon	to	see	me	off.	The	brightness	of	the	day	hurt	my	eyes	and	I	kept	my
eyes	 shut.	 Like	 a	 blind	 man	 I	 stumbled	 out	 to	 freedom.	 I	 should	 have	 vowed
revenge	at	that	moment,	planned	and	plotted,	with	my	mind	in	a	frenzy,	to	get
even	with	my	enemy,	but	sadly,	my	only	thought	was	to	get	hold	of	a	razor.	My
beard	 had	 grown	 and	 I	 badly	 needed	 a	 shave.	 Even	 now	 I	 feel	 ashamed	 for
having	had	no	other	thought	at	that	moment.
They	ignored	me	when	I	arrived	back	at	camp.	I	was	a	King	no	more,	at
least	in	their	minds.	I	searched	everywhere	for	my	lover	and	baby.	I	was	afraid
to	 confront	 any	 of	 my	 ministers.	 They	 were	 all	 too	 busy	 supervising	 the
packing	 for	 the	 journey	 back	 home	 –	 empty-handed.	 Desperate,	 I	 finally
cornered	 Maricha,	 first	 demanded	 and	 then	 begged,	 for	 information	 about
Vedavathi.
“Brace	yourself,	son.”	His	words	confirmed	what	I	had	feared	since	my
ignoble	return	and	I	sank	to	the	ground.
“How	and	when?”	I	managed	to	ask.
“Many	 people	 fell	 sick	 in	 these	 forests	 and	 there	 were	 so	 many	 deaths.
She	fell	a	victim	to	the	sickness	around	and	so	did	the	little	princess.	They	were
taken	to	a	country	doctor,	some	distance	away	but	both	succumbed	to	the	forest
fever.”	He	looked	away.
I	 wept.	 I	 didn’t	 have	 to	 pretend	 anymore.	 I	 did	 not	 want	 a	 kingdom,	 or
glory,	 let	 the	 Asura	 race	 take	 care	 of	 itself.	 Prahastha	 or	 Vidyutjihva	 or
whoever	 wanted	 the	 kingship,	 could	 take	 it.	 I	 blabbered	 on	 and	 on.	 I	 felt
Maricha’s	tears	hot	tears	fall	on	my	shoulder.	Then	a	gnawing	suspicion	raised
its	 ugly	 head.	 ‘No,	 it	 cannot	 be	 true.	 At	 least	 Maricha	 was	 my	 friend	 and	 he
would	not	have	let	it	happen.’	I	jerked	myself	free	and	confronted	him.“Who
took	her	to	the	doctor?”

Maricha’s	eyes	were	listless.	He	stared	at	a	spot	on	the	wall	and	mumbled,
“Some	soldier	or	the	other.	.	.	I	will	enquire	and	let	you	know	but	son,	you	have
to	put	it	behind	you.	.	.”
“No!”	I	shouted.	”Tell	me	who	took	them	to	the	doctor.”	I	shook	him	and	I
could	 sense	 the	 fear	 in	 his	 eyes.	 But	 his	 lips	 were	 pressed	 together	 and	 he
avoided	my	gaze.	“Was	it	Bhadra?”	I	cried	out	aloud,	dread	filling	my	bowels
as	I	uttered	the	cursed	name.
Silence.	.	.	then	he	started	again,	“Ravana,	please.	.	.	let	it	go.	.	.”
I	almost	knocked	him	down	and	ran	out.	I	had	my	sword	unsheathed	and
shouted	 for	 Bhadra.	 A	 few	 soldiers	 wew	 soldiho	 were	 engaged	 in	 a	 game	 of
chess	under	a	tree,	turned	their	heads	towards	me.	When	they	saw	the	sword	in
my	 hand,	 they	 stood	 up	 swiftly.	 One	 of	 them	 ran	 out	 and	 returned	 in	 a	 few
minutes,	bowed	and	whispered,	“Your	Highness,	Bhadra	is	on	the	way.”	His	use
of	 the	 honorific	 somehow	 soothed	 me	 a	 little.	 It	 had	 been	 a	 long	 time	 since
someone	had	addressed	me	as	a	king.	Perhaps	the	naked	sword	in	my	hand	had
done	 the	 trick.	 ‘What	 am	 I	 thinking?	 Am	 I	 so	 obsessed	 with	 power	 that	 the
instant	a	lowly	servant	shows	me	respect,	I	stoop	to	forgetting	my	lover	and	my
baby’s	death?’
By	 the	 time,	 that	 sly	 Bhadra	 came,	 I	 was	 struggling	 hard	 to	 regain	 my
anger.	I	felt	uneasy	as	he	stared	at	me	with	the	eyes	of	a	serpent.	I	turned	and
ordered	him	to	follow.	I	could	feel	his	fear	and	was	secretly	happy	to	know	that
people	still	feared	me.	As	soon	as	I	entered	my	camp,	I	caught	Bhadra	by	the
throat	and	pressed	the	blade	of	my	sword	hard	enough	to	draw	a	drop	of	blood.
He	was	afraid	and	started	rambling	incoherently.	“What	have	you	done	to	my
Vedavathi	and	the	little	one?”	I	shouted.
He	began	to	sob	and	beg	my	forgiveness.	He	told	me	what	had	happened
to	 Vedavathi	 and	 my	 baby,	 as	 I	 stood	 there	 like	 a	 pillar,	 shocked	 at	 the
ghastliness	 of	 what	 had	 transpired.	 I	 had	 feared	 they	 were	 dead,	 but	 what	 I
heard	grieved	and	shocked	me	deeply.	I	wanted	to	kick	the	fellow	wallowing	at
my	feet,	but	he	 held	 me	in	a	python-like	grip.	Despite	the	 constant	ramblings
and	incomprehensible	sounds	he	made,	some	of	it	filtered	into	my	mind	and	I
tried	to	make	sense	of	it.	Slowly,	very	slowly,	it	dawned	on	me.	‘My	daughter
was	 not	 dead.	 She	 had	 been	 adopted	 by	 a	 kind	 King,	 a	 Deva	 King,	 but	 still	 a
King,	and	was	now	growing	up	as	a	Deva	princess.’
For	a	fleeting	moment	I	was	happy.	My	daughter	was	alive.	But	she	was
now	 a	 princess	 of	 the	 enemy.	 A	 new	 energy	 rushed	 through	 me.	 I	 would
assemble	 my	 army	 and	 march	 to	 the	 kingdom	 of	 Janaka.	 I	 would	 smash	 his

armies,	 plunder	 his	 kingdom,	 and	 reclaim	 my	 daughter.	 She	 was	 an	 Asura
princess	and	no	Deva	king	could	take	her	away	from	me.	She	was	the	princess
of	Lanka,	she	had	to	grow	up	as	an	Asura	princess.	Then	I	grew	afraid.	I	had	to
regain	my	strength,	to	get	her	back.	‘Was	my	army	strong	enough?	Did	I	have
an	 army	 in	 the	 first	 place?’	 Even	 if	 I	 succeeded,	 how	 could	 I	 be	 sure	 of	 her
safety	 when	 vipers	 like	 Prahastha	 or	 Vidyutjihva,	 roamed	 freely	 in	 my
kingdom?	 I	 felt	 helpless	 and	 frustrated.	 I	 kicked	 Bhadra	 hard,	 drawing	 blood
from	his	nose.	‘Despicable	creature.’	Sometimes	I	felt	there	was	some	logic	in
the	caste	system	followed	by	the	Devas.	How	could	he	and	I	be	equals?
Thoughts	of	my	little	daughter	came	rushing	into	my	mind.	’Did	she	look
like	 me	 or	 did	 she	 resemble	 Mandodari?’	 The	 thought	 of	 Mandodari	 brought
back	memories	of	the	glowing	evenings	spent	on	the	banks	of	the	Poorna	and
Kaveri,	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the	 flowering	 trees,	 Mandodari&apos;s	 fair,	 smooth
skin,	the	smell	of	jasmine,	the	feel	of	the	cool	breeze	on	our	naked	flesh,	the
buzz	 of	 hundreds	 of	 bees	 and	 the	 chattering	 of	 squirrels,	 as	 we	 lay	 in	 each
other ’s	arms,	our	soft	love	for	each	other…
I	wrestled	myself	from	the	grip	of	the	lowly	Asura	and	dragged	my	feet
towards	the	river.	I	wanted	to	be	alone	with	my	memories.	My	wants	dissolved
in	the	sobs	of	my	soul.

30	LANKA	LOST
Bhadra
We	returned	from	central	India	empty-handed.	Everyone	was	furious	with
our	 King,	 the	 army,	 our	 ministers,	 and	 with	 each	 other.	 It	 was	 worse	 for	 me.
Vidyutjihva,	 along	 with	 some	 of	 the	 ministers,	 had	 left	 long	 before	 the	 King
was	 released	 from	 captivity.	 I	 was	 sure	 Vidyutjihva	 would	 have	 renewed	 his
affair	with	Mala	and	I	was	jealous.	I	was	stuck	with	a	foolish	King	while	Mala
was	welcoming	a	cad	back	home.	Thoughts	of	Mala	had	troubled	me	through
the	 campaign,	 but	 it	 was	 when	 Vidyutjihva	 finally	 left	 for	 Lanka,	 that	 I	 grew
even	more	concerned.	Added	to	this	was	the	sense	of	failure,	the	taunts	waiting
for	 us	 from	 the	 folk	 in	 Lanka,	 for	 returning	 in	 this	 beggarly	 fashion.	 The
frustration	of	being	blamed	solely	for	what	had	happened	to	Vedavathi,	made
me	feel	depressed.
We	added	another	humiliation	to	our	record	on	the	way	back	to	Lanka.	At
the	 southern	 foothills	 of	 the	 Vindhyas,	 the	 mighty	 half-breed,	 Bali,	 ruled.	 He
was	 disparagingly	 called	 the	 monkey-King	 and	 his	 subjects	 monkeys.	 They
were	 a	 mixture	 of	 both	 the	 Asura	 and	 Deva	 races,	 but	 were	 shunned	 and
despised	by	both.	They	led	a	life	on	the	fringes	of	both	civilizations.	That	was
until	 Bali	 squelched	 their	 inter-racial	 quibbles	 and	 united	 the	 monkey	 race.
With	their	capital	in	Kishkindha,	the	monkey	race	or	Vanaras,	became	a	threat
to	both	the	Deva	kingdoms	of	the	north	and	the	Asura	kingdoms	of	the	south.
As	they	restricted	themselves	to	the	forests	of	central	India,	we	had	not	come
into	 contact	 with	 the	 Vanaras	 during	 our	 northward	 campaign	 following	 the
coastal	route.
The	 fact	 that	 Bali’s	 younger	 brother,	 Sugreeva,	 was	 an	 enemy	 of	 the
monkey-King	and	that	great	and	reputed	warriors	like	Hanuman,	had	deserted
Bali	 to	 join	 Sugreeva’s	 camp,	 might	 have	 spurred	 on	 our	 King,	 desperately

looking	 for	 some	 success	 to	 redeem	 a	 modicum	 of	 respectability.	 It	 was	 not
that	Ravana	had	become	a	beggar	but	his	position	was	precarious.	He	lived	in
perpetual	fear	that	Prahastha	or	Vidyutjihva	would	take	over.	The	fact	that	they
had	 left	 for	 Lanka	 ahead	 of	 him,	 made	 him	 suspicious	 and	 jumpy	 and	 so	 he
decided	to	attack	Kishkindha,	hoping	to	win	back	his	lost	prestige.
The	 dispirited	 group	 attacked	 on	 a	 moonless	 night	 and	 was	 promptly
routed.	We	surrendered	easily.	The	next	morning,	when	the	monkey-King	came
to	see	his	prisoners,	he	was	surprised	to	learn	that	it	was	the	Asura	army	that
had	attacked	him.	His	comment	that	he	had	thought	us	to	be	country	bumpkins
out	on	a	night	raid,	hurt	us	more	than	any	wound	from	our	numerous	battles.
Even	 more	 insulting	 was	 the	 patronizing	 way	 in	 which	 he	 dealt	 with	 us.	 He
treated	all	of	us	with	equal	respect	and	even	apologized	for	the	inconvenience
caused.	 Then	 he	 fed	 us	 like	 honoured	 guests.	 We	 gobbled	 down	 enormous
quantities	 of	 food	 and	 got	 dead	 drunk.	 We	 danced	 till	 morning	 to	 the	 beat	 of
wild	monkey	drums.	By	morning	we	had	forgotten	our	shame	and	had	become
bosom	 pals.	 We	 swore	 eternal	 friendship	 between	 the	 Vanaras	 and	 Asuras.
Later,	when	we	left	the	monkey	kingdom,	we	witnessed	curious	scenes.	We	saw
Ravana	 hugging	 the	 monkey-King,	 who	 was	 seen	 giving	 advice	 to	 the	 Asura
king.	 We	 all	 left	 the	 place	 in	 high	 spirits	 and	 I	 overheard	 that	 an	 eternal
friendship	treaty	has	been	signed	with	the	monkey-kingdom	and	that	Bali	had
become	 our	 King’s	 friend,	 philosopher	 and	 guide.	 It	 was	 curious	 to	 say	 the
least,	but	then	such	matters	were	beyond	a	simple-minded	person	like	me.	My
main	concern	was	my	next	meal.
It	took	us	almost	a	month	to	reach	the	southern	shore	of	the	mainland.	We
all	wanted	to	cross	the	sea	and	reach	our	beloved	island	quickly.	But	Varuna’s
ships,	which	had	ferried	us	to	the	mainland,	were	not	to	be	seen.	We	waited	for
a	fortnight,	growing	more	restless	with	each	passing	day,	until	Ravana	decided
to	take	charge.	He	ordered	us	to	cut	down	trees,	and	we	soon	had	a	few	boats.	It
was	a	daring	plan,	but	Maricha	was	restless.
Finally,	he	suinally,	ggested	that	only	a	few	should	venture	to	Lanka.	He
had	the	gnawing	suspicion	that	our	king	was	no	longer	the	king	and	that	either
Vidyutjihva	or	Prahastha	had	taken	over	Lanka.	As	the	preparations	were	made,
we	 saw	 a	 fleet	 of	 ships	 coming	 towards	 the	 port	 at	 the	 mouth	 of	 the	 river
Kaveri,	where	we	were	camped.
Ravana	ordered	us	back	into	the	jungle	and	we	lay	hidden,	watching	the
ships	anchor.	They	were	the	ships	of	the	pirate-king	but	they	did	not	anchor	in
the	usual	wharfs	where	cargo	was	loaded	to	be	taken	to	the	lands	of	the	yellow

men	 or	 white	 savages.	 These	 were	 battleships.	 We	 saw	 small	 boats	 lowered
with	 men	 and	 soon	 they	 were	 furiously	 rowing	 towards	 the	 beach	 where	 we
were	camped.	We	waited	for	almost	half	an	hour	for	the	men	to	arrive.	Then
we	saw	Prahastha	and	a	few	guards,	wading	through	the	shallow	water	towards
us.	 Ravana	 and	 Maricha	 stepped	 out	 of	 their	 hiding	 places	 with	 their	 swords
unsheathed	and	walked	towards	Prahastha.
Prahastha,	 with	 his	 head	 held	 high,	 looked	 at	 Ravana	 with	 undisguised
contempt	 and	 I	 saw	 Ravana	 look	 away.	 Maricha	 recovered	 quickly	 and	 stood
between	 Prahastha	 and	 Ravana.	 To	 our	 surprise,	 Prahastha	 stepped	 aside	 and
bowed	 low	 to	 Ravana.	 A	 huge	 cheer	 rose	 from	 all	 of	 us.	 Maricha	 was	 taken
aback	and	pleasantly	surprised.	He	hugged	Prahastha.	Forgetting	discipline,	we
rushed	forward.	Prahastha	was	uncomfortable,	but	Maricha	reassured	him	and
then	asked	what	had	happened.
Reluctantly,	Prahastha	said,	“I	believe	I	made	a	mistake	when	I	decided	to
go	with	Vidyutjihva,	leaving	behind	Rav-,	I	mean,	His	Highness,	and	yourself.	I
had	 always	 suspected	 that	 rascal,	 but	 the	 depths	 to	 which	 he	 would	 sink	 were
beyond	my	understanding.	He	was	sweet	and	diplomatic	till	we	reached	Lanka,
but	 as	 soon	 as	 we	 arrived,	 he	 began	 to	 press	 for	 a	 regent	 King	 until	 you
returned.	 I	 insisted	 that	 in	 Asura	 tradition,	 even	 the	 concept	 of	 kingship	 was
new.”	 Here	 he	 glanced	 at	 Ravana,	 who	 averted	 his	 eyes.	 Prahastha	 continued,
“But	you	all	know	he	is	a	silver-tongued	orator,	and	he	bribed,	threatened	and
cajoled	 other	 members	 of	 the	 Council.	 Only	 Jambumali	 and	 I	 dissented.	 I
resigned	 from	 the	 Council	 in	 protest	 and	 would	 have	 retired	 from	 politics
altogether,	had	the	new	King	Vidyutjihva,	not	unleashed	a	reign	of	terror.	Most
of	 Vidyutjihva’s	 actions	 were	 quite	 unnecessary.	 In	 three	 months,	 he	 wrecked
the	 economy,	 increasing	 taxes	 and	 levies	 whenever	 he	 wanted.	 He	 gave	 the
pirate-King	 a	 free	 hand	 to	 plunder	 and	 divided	 the	 loot.	 But	 now	 they	 have
fallen	apart.	Varuna	is	waiting	in	that	ship	for	Rav-,	I	mean.	.	.His	Highness,	to
come	and	take	charge	of	his	navy.	He	is	thirsting	for	revenge.”
Ravana	stepped	forward	and	asked	Prahastha,	“But	what	happened	to	my
brothers,	my	wife	and	my	sister?”	We	could	sense	tension	and	concern	in	his
voice.
“Your	Highness,	your	sister	is	safe,	though	unhappy.	She’s	still	madly	in
love	with	her	husband.	I	moved	your	wife	to	a	hiding	place	in	the	hills	and	later
sent	her	to	her	father.	Our	greatest	concern	is	Prince	Kumbakarna,	who	was	the
only	 man	 to	 raise	 his	 voice	 against	 the	 tyranny	 of	 his	 brother-in-law.	 He	 is
courageous,	my	King,	but	pardon	me	for	saying	so,	very	impulsive.	And	he	is

gullible	to	a	fault.	He	was	promptly	betrayed	by	his	friends,	captured,	tortured,
and	 sent	 to	 the	 kingdom	 of	 Yama.	 He	 isn’t	 dead.	 He	 was	 sent	 to	 the	 dreaded
drug	 kingdom	 on	 the	 eastern	 slopes	 of	 the	 Sahyas,	 deep	 inside	 the	 forest,
where	 a	 brigand	 named	 Yama,	 brews	 poisonous	 potions,	 drinks,	 and	 smoke
herbs	and	drugs.	Vidyutjihva,	was	a	disciple	of	the	drug-lord	Yama,	and	he	has
rewarded	his	guru	with	an	Asura	prince	for	his	experiments.
Ravana	was,	by	now,	trembling	with	fury.	Maricha	put	a	soothing	hand	on
the	King’s	shoulder,	but	Ravana	brusquely	shook	it	off.	“Assemble	for	battle.
We	will	take	on	this	imposter,”	he	shouted.
There	 was	 sudden	 commotion.	 Now	 we	 had	 a	 Now	 we	 hpurpose,	 it	 was
not	a	meaningless	war	for	the	glory	of	a	single	man.	It	was	to	free	our	brothers
and	sisters,	our	wives	and	children,	our	parents,	from	the	hands	of	a	tyrant.	I
worried	about	Mala.
But	Prahastha	raised	his	hand	and	after	a	few	seconds,	there	was	perfect
silence.	“Your	Highness,	first	we	have	to	free	Prince	Kumbakarna.	We	do	not
know	his	condition	after	being	subjected	to	their	experiments.”
Ravana	 waited	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 before	 answering.	 Then	 with	 a	 slight
bow	he	said,	”I	value	your	wise	counsel,	my	Prime	Minister,	and	I	respect	your
wisdom.	 I	 shall	 be	 guided	 by	 you.”	 Turning	 to	 Maricha,	 who	 was	 now
beaming,	he	said,	“Uncle	Maricha,	please	send	a	messenger	to	our	friend	king
Bali,	 for	 assistance	 to	 finish	 off	 the	 drug-lord	 Yama.	 We	 need	 his	 help.”
Maricha	bowed	and	left,	summoning	our	master	runner.
Then,	 as	 an	 afterthought,	 Ravana	 asked	 Prahastha,	 “And	 what	 about	 our
younger	brother,	Vibhishna?”
Prahastha,	 suppressing	 a	 smile,	 said,	 “He,	 your	 Highness,	 has	 shut
himself	 inside	 a	 small	 temple	 he	 erected	 with	 his	 own	 hands.	 He	 prays	 to	 the
Deva	God	Vishnu,	for	deliverance	from	this	evil.	Other	than	praying,	he	does
nothing.”
“Pshaw!”	Ravana	spat	with	contempt	and	many	of	us	snickered.

31	Den	of	death
Ravana
We	had	stopped	for	a	few	days	at	Madurai,	the	ancient	temple	town	of	the
fish-Goddess,	 Meenakshi,	 to	 get	 our	 supplies,	 horses	 and	 weapons.	 Varuna
sponsored	 the	 campaign	 after	 I	 had	 agreed	 to	 return	 the	 amount	 along
enormous	interest,	once	I	regained	the	throne	of	Lanka.	I	didn’t	like	depending
on	 the	 pirate	 but	 what	 choice	 did	 I	 have?	 Moreover,	 it	 gave	 me	 some
confidence	that	the	shrewd	pirate-King	thought	I	would	regain	my	throne.	He
was	 not	 known	 to	 get	 his	 bets	 wrong.	 But	 I	 was	 well	 aware	 of	 our
shortcomings.	 We	 moved	from	 the	city	of	the	fish-eyed	goddess	and	reached
the	valley	of	death.
Yama’s	fort	stood	at	the	top	of	a	mountain,	which	almost	touched	the	sky
and	three	sides	dropped	down	into	near-vertical,	rocky	cliffs.	It	resembled	my
fort	in	Trikota,	but	was	much	more	compact	and	perched	higher.	In	the	shrubs
and	small	trees	that	surrounded	this	barren	mountain	on	the	east,	and	the	lush
green	 forests	 on	 the	 western	 side,	 Yama’s	 soldiers	 lay	 hidden,	 intoxicated	 on
drugs	 and	 hell-bent	 on	 defending	 their	 territory.	 Drunk	 on	 opium-laced
potions,	 they	 seemed	 oblivious	 to	 physical	 injuries	 and	 insulated	 from	 fear.
Somewhere	 inside	 that	 dark	 and	 forbidding	 citadel,	 in	 a	 dark	 dungeon,	 my
beloved	oaf	of	a	brother,	Kumbakarna,	lay	drugged,	or	perhaps	dead.
We	 planned	 to	 attack	 on	 a	 moonless	 night.	 At	 dead	 of	 night,	 our	 army
stormed	the	fort.	It	was	the	bitterest	battle	we	had	fought	so	far.	Yama’s	soldiers
were	not	just	fearless,	they	were	almost	inhuman.	It	took	us	till	dawn	to	effect	a
breach.	By	that	time,	hundreds	from	our	side	had	been	slain.	The	campaign	in
north	 India	 had	 been	 a	 picnic	 in	 comparison.	 Yama’s	 soldiers	 poured	 molten
metal	 onto	 our	 scampering	 army,	 catapulted	 huge	 boulders	 at	 us,	 and	 their
archers	rained	arrows	with	deadly	accuracy.	The	situation	became	hopeless.	It

was	then	that	I	heard	the	victory	cry	from	Prahastha’s	battalion.	It	came	from
the	west	side	of	the	fort	and	surprised	me.	We	had	not	bothered	about	the	west
side.	 It	 was	 surrounded	 by	 impenetrable	 rain	 forests	 and	 was	 dangerously
steep.	 Moreover,	 it	 would	 have	 hampered	 our	 progress	 and	 denied	 us	 the
advantage	of	a	night	attack.	So	when	the	victory	cry	came	from	the	west	gate	of
the	fort,	I	was	surprised.	After	almost	an	hour ’s	pitched	battle,	the	other	three
gates	were	opened	and	our	army	swarmed	into	Yama’s	citadel	from	all	sides.
WeV	hacked	our	way	through.	Our	horses	stamped	over	hundreds	of	mangled
limbs	and	severed	heads.	It	was	grotesque	and	revolting.	There	was	the	smell
of	blood,	flesh	and	excrement	of	both	of	men	and	beasts.	I	wanted	to	get	out	of
this	place.
Even	 as	 I	 kept	 stabbing	 my	 way	 through	 the	 swarms	 of	 Yama	 kingaras,
my	mind	wandered.	I	was	disgusted	by	the	meaninglessness	of	all	this.	‘I	want
to	 free	 my	 brother	 and	 get	 him	 back.	 But	 do	 I	 really?’	 Strangely,	 Prahastha’s
words,	spoken	many	years	ago,	came	to	my	mind	even	as	my	life	depended	on
my	fighting	skill	against	the	scores	of	Yama’s	soldiers	who	were	attacking	me
on	 all	 sides.	 The	 words	 were	 cold,	 precise	 and	 unpleasant.	 To	 a	 twenty-fouryear-old	who	had	romantic	notions	about	his	duty	to	his	family	and	fulfilling
his	 destiny,	 and	 who	 was	 generally	 misty-	 eyed	 about	 world,	 the	 words	 were
devastating,	‘Do	not	believe	anyone,	especially	your	siblings,	when	aspiring	for
success,	for	they	are	bound	to	be	your	bitterest	enemies.’
It	was	as	usual,	unsolicited	advice,	and	one	more	reason	to	hate	Prahastha.
And	now,	strangely	enough,	when	I	was	staking	my	life	to	save	my	brother,	this
advice	nagged	at	me.	‘Could	I	trust	my	brother?’	Then,	with	alarming	clarity,	I
understood.	This	battle	was	not	about	 saving	Kumbha,	 but	saving	myself,	my
shattered	 pride,	 confidence,	 ambition,	 and	 my	 destiny.	 Pulling	 myself	 up,	 I
concentrated	 on	 driving	 my	 sword	 through	 the	 heart	 of	 a	 boy	 barely	 sixteen
years	 old,	 thinking	 about	 his	 faceless	 mother,	 but	 with	 no	 feelings	 for	 either
him	or	her.
Finally,	 by	 late	 afternoon,	 we	 had	 taken	 the	 citadel	 and	 the	 search	 was
onto	find	my	brother,	Kumbakarna.	I	bled	from	a	thousand	cuts	and	sat	dizzily
on	my	horse.	The	place	was	eerily	silent	except	for	the	groans	and	gasps	of	the
dying	men	and	beasts.	We	had	become	used	to	the	stench	of	blood,	so	it	did	not
bother	 us	 anymore.	 I	 saw	 Prahastha	 and	 Maricha	 and	 rode	 towards	 them.
Maricha	 smiled,	 but	 Prahastha	 made	 me	 a	 curt	 bow	 and	 continued	 with	 his
work	of	ordering	the	search	parties.	Suddenly,	Maricha	turned	and	said,	“It	was
Prahastha’s	 idea	 to	take	 the	fort	from	the	west	 side.	He	had	an	ally	inside	the

fort	 who	 opened	 the	 gate	 for	 us,	 and	 as	 soon	 as	 the	 battle	 started,	 we	 moved
west.	In	fact,	Prahastha	had	positioned	many	on	the	west	side	before	the	battle
had	even	started.”
I	seethed	with	anger.	I	had	been	made	to	fight	like	a	common	soldier	and
my	ministers	had	used	me	as	part	of	their	diversionary	tactics.	I	was	angry	that
I	had	not	thought	of	the	plan	myself.	Instead	the	thousand	things	that	could	have
gone	 wrong	 occupied	 my	 mind.	 It	 was	 then	 that	 a	 big	 cheer	 arouse	 from	 the
western	end	of	the	fort	and	I	saw	a	group	of	soldiers	dancing	and	carrying	a
huge	 man	 on	 their	 shoulders.	 As	 the	 sun	 was	 setting,	 I	 had	 difficulty	 seeing
who	 they	 carried,	 though	 I	 guessed.	 As	 they	 drew	 near,	 I	 saw	 an	 almostcomatose	 Kumbakarna	 bouncing	 on	 the	 black	 shoulders	 of	 our	 men.	 It	 was
comical.	 I	 smiled	 and	 turned	 to	 Maricha.	 He	 beamed.	 Prahastha	 stood	 beside
him	with	his	habitual,	stern	expression.	I	wanted	to	ask	him	why	he	had	kept	me
in	the	dark	and	my	anger	came	rushing	back.	I	was	about	to	ask	when	Maricha
caught	my	eyes	and	hurriedly	whispered	in	my	ear,	“We	suspected	there	were
moles	among	us.	I	wanted	to	inform	you	but	Prahastha	insisted	you	should	not
know.	He	reasoned	that	you	would	not	otherwise	give	your	best	while	leading
the	battle	and	the	enemy	would	have	suspected	our	ruse.	So	we	left	you	to	fight
a	brave	battle,	while	we	sneaked	in	from	the	rear.”
I	 felt	 cheated.	 I	 felt	 small	 and	 manipulated.	 ‘I	 was	 the	 King	 and	 these
geriatricsse	geria	were	playing	 tricks	on	me.’	 I	 wanted	 to	 yell	 at	 the	 old	 men
and	just	as	I	was	about	to	spell	out	what	I	thought	of	them,	Prahastha	turned	his
head	towards	me	and	smiled.	Maricha	also	smiled.
“We	won,	Ravana,	we	won.	If	it	wasn’t	for	a	great	fight,	we	would	never
have	done	it.”	he	said	more	loudly	than	necessary.
And	 our	 entire	 army	 cheered.	 Wave	 by	 wave,	 our	 soldiers	 raised	 their
weapons	 and	 cried,	 ‘Har	 Har	 Mahadev.”	 “Victory	 to	 Shiva.”	 “Victory	 to
Ravana,	the	mighty	king	of	Asuras.”	“Victory	to	Asuras.”
My	heart	leapt	with	pride.	I	did	not	know	what	to	do	and	also	raised	my
sword.	My	army	cried	out	with	an	electrifying	voice.	Suddenly	I	remembered,
‘I	 owe	 these	 two	 oldies	 something	 big.’	 But	 then	 I	 felt	 my	 resentment	 rising
again	 and	 changed	 my	 mind	 and	 asked,	 “Uncle,	 where’s	 the	 spy	 in	 Yama’s
camp	who	helped	us?”	I	ignored	his	eyes	that	were	widening	in	surprise.	I	had
taken	off	my	diamond	necklace	and	said,	“I	wish	to	reward	him.”
“Ravana,	are	you	mad?”
My	irritation	rose.	“Either	you	tell	me,	or	I	find	him	myself.”	I	demanded.
Maricha	shook	his	head	sadly	and	said,	“Ravana,	sometimes	you	surprise

me.	 He	 was	 the	 first	 person	 Prahastha	 thrust	 his	 sword	 into	 as	 soon	 as	 we
stormed	the	fort.”
Seeing	 the	 shock	 on	 my	 face,	 he	 added,	 “Ravana,	 it	 is	 a	 fundamental
lesson	of	politics.	Never	trust	a	traitor,	even	if	he	has	done	the	dirty	work	for
you.	Tomorrow	he	may	turn	against	you.”	After	a	pause,	he	added,	“Anyway,
don’t	 worry	 about	 such	 things.	 We	 have	 won	 the	 war,	 though	 Yama	 has	 fled,
and	your	brother	is	safe.”
I	 now	 felt	 like	 an	 idiot,	 clutching	 my	 diamond	 necklace	 in	 my	 hand.	 I
wanted	to	dispose	of	it	before	Prahastha	turned	his	head	and	saw	it	in	my	hand.
I	would	not	be	able	to	withstand	his	condescending	smile.	So	I	looked	around
and	 saw	 a	 soldier	 sitting	 with	 his	 back	 supported	 by	 the	 fort	 wall	 and	 legs
spread	apart.	He	was	panting	and	puffing	and	looked	hideous	with	a	portion	of
his	nose	cut	off.	He	bled	from	many	wounds	and	I	felt	a	surge	of	pity	for	him.
This	fellow	had	suffered	for	me;	he	had	almost	laid	down	his	life.
I	 beckoned.	 For	 a	 few	 seconds	 he	 blinked	 uncomprehendingly.	 Then,	 a
look	of	sheer	terror	crossed	his	face.	He	tried	to	get	up	but	collapsed.	Then	he
crawled	towards	me.	I	felt	disgusted.	He	crawled	to	me	like	a	wounded	dog.	I
looked	at	the	diamond	necklace.	It	was	far	too	precious	for	a	dreg	like	this.	So
I	fumbled	with	my	pearl	necklace,	looked	at	it	with	some	regret,	but	before	I
could	 change	 my	 mind,	 I	 threw	 it	 at	 the	 crouching	 figure.	 It	 fell	 a	 few	 feet
short.	The	man	blinked	like	an	owl,	unable	to	comprehend	what	had	fallen	in
front	of	him.	Then	he	grabbed	it	and	smelt	it	like	a	monkey.	‘The	man	does	not
appreciate	my	gift.	How	dare	he?’	Then	it	entered	his	slow	mind	and	he	looked
at	me	with	shock	and	with	what,	at	first,	I	feared	was	contempt.	But	then,	with
elaborate	 courtesy	 and	 a	 show	 of	 gratitude,	 he	 bowed	 to	 me	 and	 kissed	 the
ground.	I	saw	his	body	shivering	and	was	afraid	he	was	going	to	die.	I	watched
fascinated.	Slowly	he	raised	his	head	and	with	tears	rolling	down	his	cheeks,	he
smiled	at	me.	His	two	front	teeth	were	missing	and	he	looked	grotesque.	I	felt
repulsed,	 but	 a	 nagging	 thought	 told	 me	 that	 I	 knew	 this	 beggar.	 I	 wanted	 to
take	a	closer	look.	I	prodded	my	horse	to	move	a	few	feet	closer	to	the	prone
figure.	 Bhadra!	 ‘Why	 does	 this	 blasted	 man	 intrude	 into	 my	 life	 always?’	 I
wanted	to	snatch	back	the	necklace	and	give	the	ugly	face	a	kick	and	whip	his
black	hideis	black.	Then	his	expression	of	gratitude	when	he	received	the	gift
came	 to	 mind	 and	 I	 calmed	 down.	 ‘It	 is	 alright,’	 I	 pacified	 myself.	 He	 too,
deserves	little	prizes.	I	felt	happy	and	content	that	I	had	done	something	right.
Later,	 when	 the	 party	 was	 over	 and	 we	 had	 retired	 to	 rest,	 when	 I	 was

drifting	 in	 and	 out	 of	 sleep,	 it	 was	 not	 Bhadra’s	 grateful	 face	 that	 I
remembered.	 I	 recalled	 instead,	 the	 look	 of	 utter	 contempt	 when	 he	 had	 first
touched	 my	 gift.	 Tossing	 restlessly,	 I	 forced	 my	 mind	 away	 from	 dark,	 ugly,
Asura	 faces,	 towards	 dreams	 of	 glory,	 ambition	 and	 the	 gold-paved	 paths	 of
my	destiny.

32	Patriot
Bhadra
We	had	returned	from	the	mainland.	Ravana	had	threatened	to	finish	off
Vidyutjihva	 and	 his	 cohorts,	 who	 were	 busy	 looting	 the	 country.	 Alarmed,
Vidyutjihva	brokered	a	peace,	offering	all	of	India,	which	Ravana	himself	had
conquered,	 except	 the	 southern	 parts	 of	 Lanka,	 which	 he	 wanted	 for	 himself.
Ravana	 wanted	 to	 take	 back	 the	 entire	 kingdom,	 but	 Soorpanakha’s	 wishes
stopped	our	King	in	his	tracks.	While	both	sides	wined,	dined	and	negotiated,
the	 people	 on	 the	 street	 fought	 for	 food,	 water,	 medicines,	 or	 simply	 turned
over	and	died.
Soon	the	dreaded	summons	came.	I	searched	for	the	pearl	necklace	in	the
small	box	where	I	thought	I	had	put	it.	‘Where	was	it?’	I	had	thrown	it	on	the
floor	as	soon	as	I	had	dragged	myself	to	my	bed	at	the	camp	that	day.	Now,	if
the	 king	 saw	 me	 without	 it,	 he	 could	 think	 I	 had	 not	 valued	 his	 gift,	 which
truthfully	I	had	not.	I	searched	everywhere	and	then	with	sudden	inspiration,	I
searched	 my	 roommate’s	 box.	 He	 was	 a	 foul-smelling	 Asura,	 who	 piously
bowed	 to	 a	 small	 Shiva	 lingam	 thrice	 a	 day	 and	 always	 quoted	 from	 longforgotten	 scriptures	 on	 morality,	truth,	life,	and	other	useless	themes.	He	 had
gone	 out	 and	 I	 yanked	 out	 his	 box	 from	 under	 his	 bed	 and	 prised	 it	 open.	 I
found	the	 necklace,	tucked	away	and	wrapped	inside	his	clothes.	I	cursed	 and
kicked	the	box	to	one	side	before	taking	the	necklace	out.	I	put	it	on	and	looked
in	 the	 hand	 mirror,	 which	 was	 one	 of	 my	 precious	 possessions,	 to	 see	 how
presentable	 I	 appeared.	 With	 a	 part	 of	 my	 nose	 cut	 off,	 a	 deep	 scar	 running
over	my	left	cheek,	and	one	and	a	half	ears,	I	looked	hideous.	I	grinned	and	the
gap	made	by	two	missing	front	teeth,	gave	me	a	funny	yet	macabre	appearance.
With	 an	 effort,	 I	 pulled	 myself	 up	 from	 the	 bed	 where	 I	 was	 sitting,
combed	 my	 hair	 with	 my	 fingers,	 and	 walked	 to	 the	 Council	 camp.	 I	 entered

and	bowed	as	low	as	possible	–	a	few	inches	more	and	I	would	have	touched
the	 floor.	 Inside	 it	 was	 dark	 and	 odorous.	 The	 usual	 thugs	 were	 there	 –
Prahastha,	with	his	stern,	impassive	face;	Maricha,	with	his	sly	smile;	Ravana,
looking	 disgusted	 to	 have	 to	 deal	 with	 scum	 like	 me;	 Jambumali,	 with	 his
fuzzy,	clerical	looks;	Kumbakarna,	with	good-natured	curiosity;	Rudraka	with
contemptuous	 scorn;	 and	 Vibhishna,	 the	 pious	 rascal,	 busy	 saving	 the	 world
with	his	mumbo	jumbo,	with	his	eyes	closed	in	contemplation.
“Bhadra,”	It	was	the	kind	voice	of	Maricha.	“Once	again,	the	entire	race
of	 Asuras	 is	 depending	 on	 you.	 Your	 country	 and	 your	 King	 need.	 .	 .”	 He
rambled	on.	It	would	have	been	better	had	he	just	told	me	what	filthy	job	they
wanted	me	for.	All	this	talk	of	patriotism	and	race	got	on	my	nerves	but	I	did
not	 dare	 voice	 my	 contempt.	 Like	 most	 of	 my	 countrymen,	 especially	 the
black-skinned,	 low-living,	 simple-minded,	 illiterate,	 and	 innocent	 millions,	 I
too	 had	 learnt	 the	 art	 of	 appearing	 submissive,	 peaceful,	 and	 the	 obedient
servant	of	the	rulers,	when	actually	a	million	mutinies	seethed	within	me.
It	 took	 me	 some	 time	 to	 understand	 I	 had	 been	 designated	 the	 task	 of
finishing	 off	 Vidyutjihva.	 My	 heart	 leapt	 with	 joy.	 I	 had	 perhaps	 judged	 the
Council	 too	 harshly	 and	 quickly.	 This	 was	 a	 god-given	 opportunity.	 I	 bowed
low	and	walked	out	without	turning	to	show	my	back.
I	had	to	wait	till	it	was	dark.	The	mission	was	exciting	and	dangerous.	To
get	into	the	fort	on	the	sly	and	assassinate	Vidyutjihva,	was	no	mean	task.	But
my	personal	hatred	for	the	man	and	my	ambition	to	do	something	worthwhile,
prodded	 me	 on.	 As	 soon	 as	 I	 returned	 from	 the	 Council,	 I	 took	 my	 dagger
from	 its	 sheath	 and	 examined	 its	 sharpness.	 Then	 I	 searched	 my	 sack	 for	 the
ingredients	to	make	a	poisonous	potion.	I	arranged	the	seven	herbs	I	needed	in
a	straight	line,	then	mixed	and	ground	them	in	various	proportions	to	make	it
deadly.	Carefully,	I	rubbed	the	potion	onto	the	blade.	Then,	taking	a	small,	thin
cloth,	I	dipped	it	in	the	poison	and	wrapped	it	over	the	dagger.	The	rest	of	the
potion	I	buried	in	one	corner.	Then,	stripped	to	my	loin	cloth,	I	put	off	the	oil
lamp	and	poured	the	oil	that	was	left	in	the	lamp	all	over	my	body	and	left	for
the	 fort.	 Strangely	 enough,	 it	 was	 not	 thoughts	 of	 death	 or	 danger	 that
engrossed	me,	but	that	I	looked	hideous.
I	 had	 chosen	 the	 darkest	 hour	 before	 dawn	 for	 my	 mission	 and	 left	 the
camp	 three	 hours	 before	 sunrise	 and	 waited	 near	 the	 rear	 gate.	 Two	 guards
slept	 in	 position,	 but	 another,	 who	 looked	 boyish,	 eagerly	 marched	 up	 and
down	with	his	spear.	He	might	have	been	a	new	recruit,	full	of	enthusiasm	to
please	 his	 boss.	 I	 sneaked	 past	 him	 and	 tried	 to	 steal	 the	 keys	 to	 the	 rear	 fort

gate,	which	were	hanging	from	a	ring	on	the	waistcloth	of	one	of	the	sleeping
guards.	 As	 I	 fumbled	 in	 the	 darkness,	 my	 hands	 slipped	 and	 the	 key	 ring	 fell
with	 a	 clang.	 I	 froze.	 The	 sleeping	 guard	 stirred	 but	 did	 not	 wake.	 I	 quickly
moved	back	into	the	deep	shadows	thrown	by	the	huge	pillars	of	the	gate.	The
boy	 was	 standing	 a	 few	 feet	 away,	 looking	 intently	 into	 the	 darkness	 where	 I
had	vanished.	I	held	my	breath.	Tentatively	he	moved	a	few	paces	towards	me
and	then	stopped.	He	seemed	to	be	in	a	dilemma,	whether	to	wake	his	superiors
or	 to	 investigate	 the	 noise	 himself.	 After	 what	 seemed	 like	 hours,	 he	 slowly
moved	 towards	 me,	 trying	 to	 adjust	 his	 vision	 to	 the	 darkness.	 I	 had	 only	 a
fraction	of	a	second	to	act.	I	pounced	on	him	with	my	dagger	drawn	and	before
he	could	react,	I	had	plunged	my	dagger	deep	into	the	hollow	of	his	throat.	He
fell	silently	to	the	ground.
I	turned	back	fast	and	faced	the	other	two	guards,	who	were	now	awake,
my	 dagger	 dripping	 blood.	 One	 of	 the	 guards	 blinked	 at	 me	 like	 a	 fish,	 a
scream	 caught	 in	 his	 throat.	 I	 walked	 towards	 him	 and	 quietly	 slit	 his	 throat.
The	third	one,	who	seemed	to	be	the	most	experienced,	reached	for	his	sword.	I
pounced	on	him,	but	he	was	quick.	He	kicked	me	with	a	vicious	force	that	sent
me	 sprawling	 onto	 the	 ground.	 Then	 he	 raised	 the	 sword	 over	 his	 head	 to
plunge	 it	 deep	 into	 my	 heart.	 I	 saw	 my	 end	 near,	 but	 I	 had	 nothing	 to	 lose.	 I
threw	the	dagger	at	his	face	and	he	froze	in	a	grotesque	position.	I	was	terrified
that	I	had	missed	him.	Then	his	disfigured	face,	with	the	dagger	struck	in	his
left	eye,	shuddered	and	his	entire	body	collapsed	onto	me.	His	sword	plunged
into	 the	 mud,	 a	 few	 feet	 above	 my	 head.	 Being	 short	 had	 its	 advantages.	 I
wriggled	out	from	under	the	giant	and	carefully	pulled	out	the	dagger	from	his
eye.
It	 was	 then	 that	 I	 heard	 footsteps.	 Other	 guards	 where	 coming	 to
investigate.	I	frantically	searched	for	an	escape	route	and	fumbled	with	the	keys
to	open	the	gate.	‘The	lock	would	not	open.’	In	a	sweat,	my	hands	shivered	with
excitement	and	sheer	terror.	‘Which	was	the	right	key?’
nt	size=“Hey	you!”	someone	shouted.	I	fumbled	again.	An	arrow	pierced
the	wooden	gate	two	inches	to	the	right	of	my	neck	while	its	vibrating	tail	sang
in	my	ear.	The	next	one	came	whining	along	and	struck	a	few	inches	to	the	left
of	 my	 shoulder.	 Its	 feathers	 caressed	 me.	 I	 could	 hear	 footsteps	 running
towards	me	but	the	lock	opened	at	last	and	I	sneaked	into	the	fort	as	a	sword
blade	hit	the	copper	edge	of	the	door	with	a	murderous	clang.	I	pushed	shut	the
door	and	once	again	fumbled	with	the	keys.	They	were	pressing	the	door	open
but	using	all	my	strength,	I	pushed	back	and	finally	managed	to	lock	it.	Then	I

ran	for	my	life.
I	could	see	torches	being	lit	in	various	parts	of	the	fort	as	I	ran	towards
the	 palace	 and	 the	 King’s	 chamber	 on	 the	 first	 floor.	 I	 scrambled	 up	 with	 the
help	of	the	vine	that	clung	to	the	walls	and	landed	on	the	verandah	like	a	cat.	I
was	quite	athletic	in	my	own	way.	The	guards	of	the	chamber	peered	over	the
balustrade	 to	 see	 what	 the	 commotion	 was	 about.	 I	 tipped	 them	 both	 over	 the
balustrade	with	a	timely	push	and	then	kicked	open	the	door	of	the	chamber.	I
waited	with	my	dagger	in	hand	but	nothing	happened.	Nothing	moved.
A	dark	figure	slept	on	the	bed	and	small	oil	lamp	flickered.	I	closed	the
door	 silently	 and	 latched	 it.	 I	 walked	 stealthily	 to	 the	 lamp	 and	 tugged	 at	 the
wick	of	the	lamp	to	brighten	the	room.	Princess	Soorpanakha!	‘Where	was	the
bastard?	Has	he	escaped?’	A	sense	of	disappointment	filled	me.	Every	second	I
stayed	 I	 got	 closer	 to	 death.	 I	 wanted	 to	 scream	 in	 frustration	 when	 I	 heard	 a
small	laugh	like	the	tinkle	of	a	bell.	It	was	faint	but	I	would	have	recognized	it	a
mile	away.	‘Mala!	What	was	she	doing	here?’	I	listened	like	a	wild	cat	on	the
prowl.	The	laugh	came	from	the	adjoining	chamber	and	suddenly	it	dawned	on
me	 that	 Mala	 was	 with	 Vidyutjihva.	 Frantically	 I	 searched	 for	 the	 door	 to	 the
adjoining	 chamber.	 I	 could	 hear	 the	 guards	 searching	 for	 me	 and	 knew	 my
chances	 of	 escape	 were	 dwindling	 by	 the	 second.	 Someone	 knocked	 on	 the
door	and	the	princess	stirred.	I	pressed	myself	against	the	wall.	She	opened	her
eyes	and	looked	towards	the	door.	She	searched	for	her	husband	with	her	hands
and	not	finding	him,	frowned.	The	knocking	got	more	urgent	as	I	desperately
felt	for	the	latch	to	the	adjoining	chamber	with	my	fingers.
“Who	is	it?”	she	asked.
“Someone	has	entered	your	room,	your	Highness,”	a	voice	cried	out.	My
heart	pounded	in	my	chest.	It	took	some	time	for	her	to	register	what	had	been
said.	Then	she	slowly	sat	up	and	after	a	few	seconds	hesitation,	walked	towards
the	door.	‘I’m	finished!’	I	thought.	The	soldiers	rushed	in	and	brusquely	pushed
aside	the	princess.	My	hand	touched	a	secret	latch	and	I	yanked	it	open.	A	door
opened	 and	 I	 fell	 onto	 my	 back.	 Instinctively	 I	 kicked	 the	 door	 closed,
scrambled	 up,	 and	 locked	 the	 door.	 In	 a	 flash	 I	 turned.	 Vidyutjihva	 was	 there
with	 my	 lover,	 lying	 on	 his	 back	 with	 she	 riding	 him.	 They	 froze	 in	 terror.
Outside,	guards	pounded	the	door.	Any	moment	they	would	break	in.
I	smacked	Mala	across	her	face	with	the	back	of	my	left	hand	so	hard	that
she	hit	the	wall	three	feet	away.	I	jumped	onto	Vidyutjihva	and	sat	on	his	belly.	I
could	not	help	smirking.	With	a	viciousness	that	I	never	thought	I	possessed,	I
slashed	 him	 again	 and	 again	 across	 his	 handsome	 face	 with	 my	 poisoned

dagger.	 He	 was	 long	 dead	 when	 I	 decided	 to	 cut	 off	 his	 penis.	 I	 did	 not	 even
feel	Mala	tearing	my	back	with	her	nails	trying	to	save	her	lover	or	the	sound
of	the	guards	pulling	open	the	door.	Only	the	scream	of	the	princess	brought
me	 back	 to	 my	 senses.	 The	 guards	 were	 too	 shocked	 by	 the	 grisly	 sight	 to
attack	 me.	 I	 was	 not	 sure	 whether	 the	 princess	 screamed	 for	 her	 murdered
husband	or	his	betrayal	his	bet.	I	pitied	her.	Blood	dripped	from	my	body	and	I
was	exhausted.	I	had	almost	given	up	when	Princess	Soorpanakha	screamed	at
the	 top	 of	 her	 voice,	 “Bhadra,	 Bhadra.	 .	 .	 my	 brother	 sent	 you	 to	 kill	 my
husband.	Ravana.	.	.why,	why?”	She	slapped	her	head	with	both	her	hands.
I	was	shocked	but	when	all	the	guards’	attention	turned	to	the	screaming
princess,	 I	 escaped.	 The	 window	 was	 open	 and	 I	 jumped	 out	 in	 a	 trice.	 The
captain	 of	 the	 guards	 shouted	 as	 I	 fell.	 My	 fall	 was	 arrested	 by	 a	 sprawling
Ashoka	 tree	 and	 I	 bounced	 off	 its	 branches	 and	 rolled	 onto	 the	 ground.	 I	 did
not	know	it	then,	but	I	had	broken	three	ribs	and	my	arm	in	the	fall.	But	at	the
time	nothing	mattered.	I	ran	for	dear	life,	exhilarated	at	the	thought	of	having
accomplished	 great	 things	 for	 my	 master,	 my	 race,	 my	 nation,	 and	 myself.
Arrows	rained	from	all	sides	but	miraculously,	I	was	never	hit.	I	knew	a	break
in	the	west	wall,	from	where	I	could	jump	into	the	sea,	provided	I	could	reach
it.	I	ran	with	all	the	strength	left	to	me.	A	few	more	steps,	a	few	more	steps,	that
was	all	and	the	mother	sea	would	take	me	safely	into	her	bosom.	As	I	reached
the	breach	in	the	wall,	I	had	a	strange	sensation	–	no	one	was	chasing	me.	‘Was
it	a	dream?’	I	was	afraid	to	stop	and	look.
Then	I	heard	the	conches	blowing.	Surprised,	I	stopped	and	turned	back.	A
procession	 entered	 through	 the	 wide	 open	 main	 gate	 of	 the	 fort.	 Ravana	 sat
atop	 an	 elephant,	 as	 befitted	 an	 Emperor,	 with	 his	 huge	 army	 of	 elephants,
cavalry,	chariots,	infantry	and	musicians,	all	marching	in	with	great	splendour.
Chendas	 were	 beaten	 with	 great	 gusto,	 the	 curved	 horn	 trumpets	 were	 blown
and	 cymbals	 clanged.	 One	 by	 one,	 the	 loyal	 guards	 of	 Vidyutjihva	 laid	 down
their	 arms.	Jai	Shankar!	Har	 har	 Mahadev!	 Hail	 Ravana!	 ‘Victory.	 Victory	 at
last!’And	I	was	instrumental.	Pride	swelled	my	chest	and	ignoring	the	pain	in
my	body,	I	ran	towards	the	procession.
As	I	neared	it,	I	was	suddenly	ashamed.	I	was	in	my	loin	cloth.	I	was	dark
and	 ugly	 and	 bleeding	 from	 a	 hundred	 places.	 These	 were	 Asura	 nobles
marching	 in	 full	 glory.	 As	 I	 stood	 there,	 right	 in	 the	 path	 of	 the	 procession,
vacillating,	two	soldiers	ran	towards	me	and	forcibly	dragged	me	off	the	path
of	the	victory	march	and	dumped	me	on	the	pavement.	I	lay	there	in	shame,	a
sense	of	betrayal	pressing	hard	against	my	heart.	I	could	hear	the	tinkle	of	the

bell	of	the	royal	elephant	approaching	and	lifted	my	head	and	caught	Ravana’s
eye.	‘Was	it	disgust,	hatred	or	gratitude	I	saw	there?’	I’m	still	not	sure.	In	my
charitable	moods	I	felt	it	was	gratitude,	but	sometimes	I	thought	it	was	hatred.	It
was	likely	that	Ravana	had	not	even	recognized	me.
The	 procession	 passed.	 I	 raised	 my	 head	 when	 a	 shadow	 fell	 across	 my
face	and	saw	Maricha.	There	was	pity	and	even	some	gratitude	in	his	eyes.	For
the	first	time	I	sensed	someone	cared	for	me	and	tears	welled	inside.	I	tried	to
raise	myself	but	collapsed.	Maricha	tried	to	get	off	his	horse,	then	he	froze.	I
followed	 his	 gaze.	 Prahastha,	 who	 was	 ahead,	 had	 stopped	 his	 horse	 and	 was
staring	back	at	the	scene.	Maricha	got	a	firm	grip	firm	on	his	reins	and	trotted
towards	the	Prime	Minister	without	looking	back.
A	 bitter	 laughed	 escaped	 me.	 I	 collapsed	 back	 into	 the	 ditch,	 laughing
hysterically.	 As	 the	 sun	 rose	 and	 the	 day	 progressed,	 becoming	 increasingly
more	 hot	 and	 humid,	 I	 found	 some	 strength	 to	 totter	 back	 to	 my	 hut.	 The
sounds	 of	 celebration	 could	 be	 heard	 all	 around.	 Some	 people	 had	 thrown	 a
few	coins	at	me	as	I	lay	in	the	ditch	and	after	a	few	minutes	few	minhesitation,	I
collected	them.	I	was	not	sure	I	could	work	for	the	next	few	days	as	the	pain
had	 intensified.	 Every	 coin	 would	 count.	 Celebrations	 erupted	 everywhere.
Emperor,	princes	and	nobles,	everyone	was	in	a	gay	mood.	They	had	achieved
victory.	But	I	had	a	hut	to	go	to,	a	hole	to	crawl	into	and	lick	my	wounds,	and
an	 unfaithful	 woman	 to	 deal	 with,	 and	 also	 a	 living	 to	 earn.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 was
concerned,	these	things	were	more	important	than	the	coronation	of	Emperors.
So	I	kept	walking.

33	Son	of	darkness
Ravana
She	was	hysterical.	Soorpanakha	flew	at	my	face	and	tore	my	cheek	with
her	bare	hands.	She	tried	to	bite	and	maim	anyone	who	dared	to	venture	near
her.	With	her	hair	disheveled,	her	face	black	with	agony,	she	kept	cursing	me
and	all	the	ministers	of	Lanka,	occasionally	beating	her	breasts	with	clenched
fists.	She	guarded	the	dead	body	of	Vidyutjihva	like	a	hound.	She	kept	the	priest
at	bay	and	anointed	the	dead	body	herself.	She	dressed	it	in	new	clothes,	all	the
while	 cursing	 us,	 me	 in	 particular.	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to	 console	 her.	 True,	 I	 had
wanted	her	husband	dead	and	was	responsible	for	the	same.	But	he	had	had	it
coming	to	him.	He	had	signed	his	death	warrant	when	he	usurped	my	throne.
He	had	asked	for	trouble.
Bhadra	 had	 done	 it	 for	 me.	 The	 thing	 I	 hated	 most	 about	 this	 nasty
business	 was	 the	 fact	 that	 I	 owed	 that	 stupid	 man.	 ‘Or	 did	 I?	 He	 was	 a	 mere
slave	 and	 had	 to	 do	 what	 I	 bid	 him.	 Period.’	 I	 looked	 at	 the	 corpse	 of	 my
brother-in-law.	 They	 had	 cleaned	 it,	 but	 still	 it	 looked	 grotesque.	 When	 I	 had
seen	 the	corpse	 for	the	 first	time,	I	had	almost	thrown	up.	One	had	to	have	a
really	 perverted	 mind	 to	 do	 something	 like	 that.	 What	 sort	 of	 creature	 was
Bhadra?	 Disgusting!	 A	 high-pitched	 wail	 shocked	 me	 from	 my	 reverie.
Soorpanakha	was	banging	her	head	on	the	floor.	And	behind	her,	wailing	in	a
much	shriller	pitch,	was	my	mother.	I	had	not	expected	her	to	come	so	soon.
‘Satisfied,	 you	 blood-sucking	 Rakshasa?”	 I	 went	 pale	 at	 this	 unexpected
attack.	 “You’ve	 made	 your	 own	 sister	 a	 widow.	 I	 am	 ashamed	 that	 you	 were
even	born	in	my	womb.”
I	 clenched	 my	 fists	 to	 keep	 myself	 from	 exploding.	 With	 her	 every
remark,	 Soorpanakha’s	 wails	 reached	 new	 heights.	 “You	 tyrant.	 .	 .you	 dog.	 .
.You’ve	made	my	child	weep	like	this	and	you’ll	pay	for	it…you’ll	pay	for	it

dearly.”	 She	 kept	 on	 in	 this	 vein	 for	 the	 next	 half	 hour,	 praising	 the	 various
aspects	of	her	son-in-law.	It	would	have	been	comical	had	she	not	dragged	me
into	the	farce.	“You	are	drunk	with	power,	intoxicated	with	ambition.	Kill	me!
Kill	 me	 also,	 and	 use	 my	 old	 body	 as	 a	 stepping	 stone	 to	 your	 political
success,”	 my	 mother	 said,	 hitting	 her	 forehead	 and	 breasts.	 Then	 she	 started
pummelling	my	chest.
My	 father	 had	 come	 too	 and	 was	 sitting	 in	 a	 corner,	 busily	 discussing
something	 with	 the	 two	 Brahmins	 who	 always	 accompanied	 him.	 I	 felt	 like
grabbing	 his	 hair	 and	 banging	 his	 head	 against	 the	 wall.	 He	 was	 planning	 a
Deva	 funeral	 for	 his	 son-in-law,	 with	 some	 obscure	 rites	 and	 gifts	 to	 the
Brahmins.	I	just	wanted	to	get	it	over	with.
However	 difficult	 Soorpanakha	 acted,	 it	 was	 nothing	 compared	 to
Kumbakarna.	The	imprisonment	in	Yama’s	dungeon	had	changed	him	for	the
worse	 and	 he	 was	 stoned	 most	 of	 the	 time.	 He	 slept	 for	 most	 of	 the	 day	 and
created	a	ruckus	when	he	woke.	I	was	worried	about	him.	I	was	worried	about
myself.	 We	 were	 a	 close-knit	 family	 and	 I	 enjoyed	 my	 siblings’	 company.
‘What	had	changed	between	us	to	destroy	the	bond?	Why	did	Soorpanakha	go
and	 maPrry	 my	 bitterest	 enemy?	 And	 when	 I	 killed	 him	 for	 self-preservation,
why	did	she	hold	it	against	me?’	Even	as	the	thoughts	went	through	me,	I	felt
for	her,	it	was	after	all	her	husband	who	was	lying	dead.	She	had	the	right	to
feel	 the	way	she	did	about	me.	‘Poor	girl.	Perhaps	 I	should	 not	 have	been	so
harsh.’	I	should	have	imprisoned	her	husband.	I	could	have	compromised.
Vidyutjihva’s	face	had	been	gashed	haphazardly.	I	felt	a	surge	of	deep	and
pure	 hatred	towards	Bhadra.	‘How	could	he	do	 a	 thing	like	this?	This	was	 an
Asura	nobleman	who	has	been	butchered	like	a	wild	animal	and	that	too,	by	the
lowliest	 of	 low	 vermins.’	 I	 felt	 ashamed	 that	 I	 had	 entrusted	 the	 task	 to	 him.
There	was	no	heroism	in	this	victory.	‘I	was	scum,	no	better	than	Bhadra.	Why
did	I	listen	to	Prahastha.	Self-righteous	oaf.	Oh	Shiva,	what	have	I	done	to	my
sister?’	Why	did	I	take	away	even	the	small	happiness	she	possessed?	Was	the
empire	 worth	 it?	 Was	 Lanka	 or	 even	 India,	 enough	 to	 quench	 my	 ambition?
And	what	was	it	that	I	was	building	on	the	corpses	of	my	people?	How	many
deaths	 would	 I	 feel	 responsible	 for?	 Were	 we	 not	 much	 happier	 in	 that
precariously	hanging	hut	over	the	cliff?	The	biggest	tragedy	of	life	was	that	we
grow	up	and	achieve	our	boyhood	dreams.
A	 hard	 slap	 on	 my	 face	 shook	 me	 from	 my	 immature	 philosophical
ruminations.	The	entire	room	swam	before	my	eyes	and	I	staggered	and	fell.	I
was	blinded	for	some	moments	and	my	head	spun.	I	tried	getting	up,	only	to	be

kicked	hard	in	my	groin.	“You	bastard!”	I	could	hear	Kumbakarna’s	shouts	as
though	they	came	from	a	deep	well.	My	head	reeled	as	I	tried	to	stand	up,	but
was	 kicked	 back	 again.	 My	 eyes	 were	 swollen	 and	 my	 lips	 split.	 Somehow	 I
stood	up,	holding	onto	a	pillar	in	the	centre	of	the	room	to	prevent	me	from
falling.	 Slowly,	 the	 scene	 cleared.	 Maricha	 and	 three	 soldiers	 were	 trying	 to
reign	in	Kumbakarna.	His	eyes	looked	murderous	and	he	was	stoned.	He	tried
to	free	himself	and	lunge	towards	me	and	kick	me	again	but	didn’t	reach	me.
I	 turned	 and	 saw	 my	 father	 and	 the	 two	 fat	 Brahmins	 smirking	 and
enjoying	 the	 show.	 My	 mother	 hit	 her	 head	 with	 her	 hands	 melodramatically
and	Soorpanakha	stared	straight	ahead	with	a	stony	expression.	A	few	guards
were	almost	smiling	but	trying	hard	to	keep	straight	faces.	This	kind	of	family
drama	was	so	exciting	to	the	dregs	of	our	society.	By	evening,	the	entire	city
would	be	abuzz	with	a	much	exaggerated	version	of	what	had	happened.	More
than	the	pain	of	this	unexpected	attack,	it	was	the	shame	that	stung	me	more.
Seeing	 the	 growing	 darkness	 on	 my	 face,	 Maricha	 dragged	 my	 brother
from	the	room.	I	would	have	killed	him	right	there	but	guilt	weighed	me	down.
I	 stood	 there	 with	 shame	 and	 guilt	 burning	 through	 every	 nerve,	 but	 did	 not
move	a	finger.	Kumbha	shouted	about	my	ambitions,	my	exaggerated	sense	of
self-importance,	 my	 selfishness,	 my	 contempt	 for	 people,	 my	 undeserving
pride,	and	my	real	and	imagined	vices.	He	cursed	me	and	wished	I	would	die.
I	could	not	stand	it	anymore	and	wanted	to	retire	to	my	room	and	drink
myself	to	unconsciousness.	As	I	turned,	I	looked	out	at	the	garden.	There,	my
pious	brother,	Vibhishana,	sat	cross-legged,	his	eyes	closed,	and	a	silly	smile
of	 contentment	 on	 his	 face.	 ‘What	 was	 there	 to	 be	 so	 smug	 and	 happy	 about
when	the	entire	household	was	in	tremendous	pain?’	I	wanted	to	walk	towards
him	 and	 wipe	 that	 wooden	 smile	 from	 his	 face	 but	 he	 was	 perhaps	 the	 most
harmless	 fellow	 in	 our	 whole	 clan.	 The	 guy	 was	 without	 ambition,	 selfsatisfied	 with	 himself,	 and	 always	 detached	 from	 life	 and	 its	 trials.	 After
passionate	Kumbha,	Soorpanakha,	mother	and	even	myself,	he	n	myselfwas	a
welcome	 change.	 I	 had	 not	 been	 blessed	 with	 a	 simple	 mind	 and	 I	 envied	 my
younger	 brother	 for	 his	 contentment	 and	 uncomplicated	 way	 of	 living.
Perhaps,	 a	 life	 without	 ambition	 was	 a	 life	 worth	 living.	 I	 could	 never	 have
become	 Vibhishana,	 even	 if	 I	 had	 wanted	 to,	 but	 I	 had	 never	 wanted	 to	 be
anyone	 other	 than	 Ravana.	 I	 sighed	 and	 left	 my	 philosopher	 brother	 to	 his
blissful	stupidity	and	walked	to	my	chamber.	I	wanted	a	drink.	As	I	entered,	I
saw	Mandodari	sitting	on	the	bed.	She	was	dressed	in	glittering	silk	clothes	and
gold	 and	 diamond	 ornaments,	 and	 resembled	 a	 walking	 treasury.	 Her	 face	 lit

up	as	soon	as	she	saw	me.
I	was	hit	by	a	sudden	sense	of	guilt	and	shame.	Vedavathi’s	fair	face	was
fresh	in	my	mind	and	I	could	not	help	comparing	her	to	my	wife.	Mandodari
was	beautiful	in	a	stern	sort	of	way,	but	she	was	not	sexy	at	all.	She	was	almost
a	saint	and	I	was	a	rather	nervous	and	afraid	of	her.	It	was	like	she	was	holding
a	mirror	for	my	soul	and	it	showed	all	my	hidden,	ugly	scars	and	warts.	I	hid
my	 nervousness	 behind	 a	 veneer	 of	 contempt	 and	 irritation.	 With	 surprise,	 I
realized	 she	 had	 never	 been	 in	 my	 mind	 during	 my	 long	 campaign,	 not	 even
when	I	was	imprisoned	in	Karthiveerarjuna’s	dark	dungeon	or	fighting	life	or
death	battles.	All	I	yearned	for	was	Vedavathi.	And	I	ached	to	see	my	first	born.
As	 I	 stood	 transfixed	 with	 awkwardness,	 she	 stood	 up	 with	 a	 sad	 smile.
Her	smile	lit	up	her	face	and	I	could	not	face	her.	I	looked	out	and	my	irritation
increased	when	I	saw	my	brother	continuing	his	meditation.	When	I	turned,	she
was	 so	 near	 that	 I	 could	 smell	 her.	 She	 smelt	 of	 fresh	 jasmine	 and	 camphor.
Tears	brimmed	her	eyes	as	she	batted	her	eyelids.	She	looked	almost	coy	and
innocent.	 I	 felt	 like	 hugging	 her	 and	 wiping	 the	 tears	 from	 those	 lovely	 eyes
but	my	limbs	would	not	move.	Something	was	holding	me	back.
“Woman,	 where	 have	 you	 kept	 the	 wine?”	 I	 sounded	 coarse	 even	 to
myself	and	looked	away.	I	could	feel	her	hurt	and	did	not	want	to	look	at	her.	I
walked	 towards	 the	 chair	 and	 sat	 there	 looking	 at	 the	 ceiling.	 ‘How	 was	 she
feeling?	 How	 had	 Vidyutjihva	 treated	 her?	 Did	 she	 miss	 me?’	 Hundreds	 of
questions	 swirled	 within	 me,	 but	 I	 kept	 quiet.	 I	 wanted	 to	 boast	 about	 my
campaigns,	to	tell	her	about	the	sights	I	had	seen,	the	strange	and	exotic	lands
of	the	Devas,	tales	of	the	vanquished	tribes,	the	pain	of	imprisonment,	the	rout
at	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 monkey-King	 Bali,	 and	 even	 my	 tempestuous	 love	 affair
with	a	Deva	Brahmin	girl	–	but	I	kept	staring	at	the	ceiling.
Mandodari	poured	the	wine	and	retreated	towards	the	shadow	of	the	big
bed.	Without	a	word,	I	gulped	down	the	wine	and	impatiently	tapped	my	fingers
on	 the	 stool.	 She	 hurriedly	 came	 back	 and	 poured	 me	 another	 drink.	 I	 kept
drinking.	An	eerie	silence	engulfed	the	palace.	Occasionally	it	was	punctuated
by	the	distant	wails	of	my	mother	or	sister.	When	I	heard	those	piteous	cries,	I
felt	 guilty	 and	 tried	 to	 drown	 my	 feelings	 in	 more	 wine.	 Then	 the	 drone	 of
Vedic	mantras	rose	from	the	hall	where	the	corpse	lay.	Those	Brahmins	were
preparing	the	soul	of	my	brother-in-law	to	cross	various	kind	of	rivers	made
of	butter,	honey,	and	the	rest,	on	its	way	towards	the	Deva	heaven.	Some	lowly
guard	 came	 to	 announce	 that	 they	 were	 taking	 Vidyutjihva’s	 body	 to	 the
cremation	ground	and	were	waiting	for	me	to	come	and	pay	my	last	respects.

I	 stood	 up	 in	 anger	 and	 the	 wine	 glasses	 tumbled	 from	 the	 stool,
spreading	 stains	 on	 the	 plush	 carpet.	 I	 yelled	 at	 the	 poor	 guard	 and	 threw	 a
glass	at	him	with	such	force	that	had	it	hit	him,	he	would	have	died	on	the	spot.
The	wine	splattered	and	the	guard	ran	for	his	life.	I	shut	the	door	after	him	with
a	 bang	 and	 shut	 the	 window	 also,	 though	 my	 brother	 had	 uncoiled	 himself
from	his	ridiculous,	yogic	posture	and	vanished,	perhaps	to	assirhaps	tost	the
fat	Brahmins.
Then	I	turned	towards	my	wife.	She	trembled	with	fear.	I	grabbed	her	by
her	waist	but	she	pushed	me	away	with	surprising	force	and	drunk	as	I	was,	I
staggered	 and	 fell.	 “Do	 not	 touch	 me.”	 she	 said	 in	 a	 low	 but	 firm	 voice.	 She
almost	hissed	like	a	snake.	Like	a	fool,	I	sat	there	on	the	floor	blinking,	taken
aback	and	confused	by	the	strength	exhibited	by	such	a	meek	woman.	“Do	not
try	 to	 touch	 me	 in	 this	 drunken	 state.”	 She	 stood	 there,	 her	 head	 raised	 high,
defying	me,	daring	me	to	touch	her.
I	 stood	 up	 in	 great	 anger	 and	 tried	 to	 grab	 her	 again.	 She	 picked	 up	 the
fruit	knife	from	the	bowl	and	pointed	it	at	me.	‘Ah,	I	liked	it.	She	had	spirit.	I
was	enjoying	this.’	Then,	to	my	utter	dismay,	she	pointed	the	knife	towards	her
belly	and	said,	“You	make	one	move	to	touch	me.	.	.”	She	broke	 into	sobs	that
shook	 her	 entire	 body	 and	 I	 felt	 disgusted	 with	 the	 whole	 thing.	 I	 could	 so
easily	 have	 overpowered	 her	 but	 no	 longer	 wanted	 to.	 Instead,	 I	 threw	 a
tantrum,	tore	the	pillows,	threw	the	silk	sheet	from	the	bed	and	stamped	on	it.
After	a	while,	I	felt	foolish	and	left	the	room	cursing	my	wife	and	banging	the
door	shut.
I	was	in	a	murderous	and	helpless	rage.	It	was	unfortunate	that	a	fair	and
lovely	maid	was	sweeping	the	corridor	at	the	time.	When	she	saw	me	storming
out	of	the	royal	chamber,	her	mouth	opened	in	stupid	awe	and	she	dropped	her
broom	 and	 started	 to	 run.	 I	 had	 not	 even	 noticed	 her,	 but	 her	 nervousness
caught	my	eye.	I	chased	after	her	and	almost	dived	to	catch	her	by	the	waist.	I
muffled	her	screams	with	my	palms	and	dragged	her	to	a	nearby	room.	Then	I
raped	 her.	 To	 start	 with,	 she	 was	 unwilling;	 perhaps	 she	 had	 thought	 I	 was
going	to	murder	her.	But	after	a	while,	she	became	quite	obliging.	So	while	my
sister	 cried	 over	 her	 murdered	 husband;	 my	 mother	 sat	 cursing	 me;	 my
brothers	 lit	 my	 brother-in-law’s	 funeral	 pyre;	 and	 my	 wife	 was	 sobbing	 her
heart	 out,	 I,	 the	 King,	 the	 Emperor	 of	 India	 was	 busy	 with	 a	 low	 caste	 maid.
And	from	that	sin	and	guilt,	my	dark,	fat	and	ugly	son,	Athikaya,	was	born.

34	Riot
Bhadra
It	 took	 almost	 a	 year	 for	 me	 to	 recover.	 My	 hut	 was	 gutted	 when	 the
Asuras	 were	 busy	 looting	 and	 fighting	 each	 other.	 Not	 only	 my	 locality,	 but
most	 houses	 and	 shops	 were	 burnt	 down	 during	 those	 turbulent	 days	 when
Ravana	and	Vidyutjihva	were	performing	their	macabre	dance	for	power.	I	was
bitter	for	a	few	days.	Mala	had	returned	to	the	small	shack	I	had	put	up	under
the	huge	Banyan	tree	on	the	side	of	the	royal	highway.	Before	that,	I	had	made
my	own	enquires	about	her	and	found	that	she	was	a	minor	maid	at	the	palace.
There	were	rumours	that	she	was	pregnant	by	the	king	and	she	had	been	made
the	second	queen	by	Ravana.	I	was	jealous	and	hurt.	I	wanted	to	murder	her	but
she	was	far	too	high	up	in	the	pecking	order	now.
Then,	one	day,	she	came.	She	did	not	look	like	a	queen	at	all.	She	looked
plain	 and	 dirty	 and	 carried	 a	 bundle	 of	 rags	 on	 her	 shoulders,	 the	 traces	 of
vanishing	 beauty	 making	 her	 seem	 more	 ugly.	 For	 someone	 who	 was	 the
King’s	 mistress,	 Mala’s	 situation	 was	 pathetic.	 The	 anger	 I	 had	 felt	 at	 her
betrayal	 had	 numbed	 to	 a	 dull	 pain.	 She	 might	 have	 been	 selling	 herself	 for
some	food	and	small	pleasures,	or	that	was	the	only	way	a	poor	but	beautiful
woman	could	survive	among	kings	like	Vidyutjihva	and	Ravana.	I	burned	with
anger,	self-pity	and	jealousy,	for	few	months	after	I	returned	from	my	heroics.
But,	by	the	time	she	came,	I	had	cooled	off.	I	was	running	a	high	temperature
on	that	particular	day	when	she	returned	to	my	hut,	and	without	saying	a	single
word,	she	began	to	nurse	me.	Whether	she	had	begged	or	stolen	some	rice,	BI
did	not	know	but	she	made	some	gruel.	She	fed	it	to	me	that	and	inexplicably,	I
began	to	cry.	She	did	not	say	anything	but	kept	feeding	me	the	gruel	with	a	leaf
spoon.
By	the	time,	I	recovered,	it	was	too	late	to	ask.	I	needed	her	and	I	believe

she	 needed	 me,	 at	 least	 until	 the	 next	 great	 man	 beckoned	 her	 to	 satisfy	 him.
Slowly	I	fell	into	a	routine.	It	was	a	time	of	relative	calm	and	peace	and	most
days	 we	 earned	 enough	 to	 eat	 at	 least	 once.	 The	 beggars	 and	 destitutes,	 the
magicians	 and	 snake	 charmers,	 the	 acrobats	 and	 gypsies,	 who	 frequented	 the
city	 markets,	 the	 streets	 and	 narrow	 winding	 lanes	 of	 the	 city,	 the	 palace,	 the
temples,	the	countryside,	usually	came	to	rest	under	the	Banyan	tree.	It	was	the
travellers’	natural	resting	place.	Out	of	sheer	boredom,	I	began	experimenting
with	various	foods	and	shared	it	with	the	wayfarers.	Mala	helped	me	built	our
first	thatched	shop	where	we	sold	sweets	and	snacks.	But	occasionally,	she	did
odd	 jobs	 in	 the	 palace	 and	 she	 also	 took	 her	 son,	 Athikaya,	 to	 the	 palace
regularly.	Though	I	hated	her	for	it,	it	had	been	a	long	time	since	I	had	enjoyed
the	peace	and	pleasure	of	a	full	stomach	and	I	did	not	want	to	rock	the	boat.
Mala	took	over	the	responsibility	of	cooking	and	serving	the	snacks	and
other	 food.	 I	 found	 I	 had	 another	 talent	 –	 for	 a	 small	 sum,	 I	 would	 wash	 the
travellers’	 clothes.	 I	 knew	 which	 plant	 or	 seed	 cleaned	 the	 clothes	 well	 and	 I
kept	experimenting.	A	couple	of	times	though,	the	clothes	lost	their	colour,	but
I	soon	found	the	right	mix	and	my	reputation	as	a	good	washerman	spread.	The
kind	of	patrons	I	had	also	changed	and	rich	merchants	started	trusting	me	with
their	expensive,	imported,	silk	clothes	from	China,	or	the	rich	calico	or	muslin
from	mainland	India.
The	 wayside	 shop	 soon	 became	 a	 centre	 of	 gossip	 and	 merrymaking.
Even	though	I	had	felt	sad	to	be	excluded	from	the	great	parties	at	the	palace,	I
chided	myself	for	reaching	beyond	my	position.	I	had	had	enough	of	moving
around	 with	 eccentric	 and	 egoistic	 kings	 and	 nobles,	 who	 were	 willing	 to
sacrifice	a	person	at	the	altar	of	their	burning	ambition.	Here,	life	was	simple
and	straight-forward	and	I	was	the	master	of	the	small	thatched	hut	we	had	built
with	our	own	hands.
I	 heard	 that	 Princess	 Soorpanakha	 had	 left	 Lanka	 with	 her	 father	 and
mother,	for	the	mainland.	She	had	vowed	that	she	would	never	look	at	her	elder
brother,	Ravana,	again.	It	might	have	been	an	exaggeration	but	it	was	said	that
she	 cursed	 her	 brother	 and	 Lanka	 and	 the	 Asuras,	 with	 colourful	 vocabulary,
until	she	boarded	Varuna’s	ship.	The	ship	had	many	coloured	sails	and	swiftly
took	 a	 smug	 Brahmin,	 an	 angry	 mother,	 and	 her	 widowed	 daughter,	 to	 the
mainland.	If	the	king	was	affected	by	any	of	this,	he	did	not	show	it.	She	had
called	him	Rakshasa,	and	curiously,	the	name	struck,	though	no	one	dared	call
him	that	to	his	face.
The	next	great	event	was	the	marriages	of	Prince	Kumbakarna	and	Prince

Vibhishana.	It	was	a	big	jamboree	and	the	entire	city	participated.	I	too	wanted
to	go,	but	I	was	bitter	that	no	special	invitation	had	been	sent	to	me.	I	was	too
proud	 to	 go	 as	 an	 ordinary	 Asura	 beggar.	 On	 the	 night	 of	 the	 marriage,	 the
nobles	got	drunk	on	wine	imported	from	the	cold	lands	of	the	barbarians,	far
across	 the	 seas,	 while	 we	 humble	 folk	 got	 drunk	 on	 palm	 toddy,	 which	 we
brewed.	 My	 neighbours,	 the	 snake	 charmers	 and	 the	 street	 magicians	 and
acrobats,	 earned	 a	 fistful	 of	 money	 for	 their	 performances,	 which	 they
promptly	handed	over	to	me	for	my	specially	made	country	liquour.
The	 palace	 gossip	 was	 always	 juicy	 and	 we	 all	 revelled	 in	 the	 scandals
involving	 the	 high	 and	 the	 mighty.	 The	 juiciest	 one	 involved	 a	 sweeper.	 She
had	 given	 birth	 to	 an	 ugly	 and	 black	 baby	 whose	 features	 resembled	 King
Ravana.	It	was	rumoured	that	initially	the	king	had	raped	her,	but	then	she	had
become	his	misecome	hitress.	These	stories	were	told	by	traders	and	vendors
and	whenever	this	topic	came	up,	I	maintained	a	judicious	silence.	The	rumour
even	 went	 to	 the	 extent	 that	 whenever	 the	 pious	 and	 saintly	 queen	 was
dispossessed	 for	 sex,	 either	 physically	 or	 spiritually,	 the	 king	 called	 for	 this
sweeper.	Soon	many	knew	it	was	Mala	and	they	flirted	with	her	even	more.
I	tried	to	physically	stop	her	from	visiting	the	palace	many	times,	but	she
somehow	sneaked	out.	When	she	came	back,	I	made	her	life	hell,	but	she	took
my	thrashing	and	kicking	with	remarkable	forbearance.	She	finally	confessed
that	 Ravana	 had	 indeed	 raped	 her	 and	 that	 Athikaya	 was	 his	 child.	 But	 she
claimed	that	after	that	incident,	the	King	had	never	bothered	her	and	had	always
treated	 her	 with	 supreme	 contempt.	 It	 was	 Queen	 Mandodari	 who	 summoned
her	to	the	palace	often.	It	was	only	the	queen’s	love	for	Athikaya	that	took	Mala
to	the	palace.	My	thrashing	her	after	her	routine	palace	visits	became	a	sort	of
ritual.	And	our	marriage,	if	we	could	call	it	that,	survived.
Almost	 a	 month	 after	 the	 birth	 of	 this	 illicit	 child	 of	 Ravana,	 the	 queen
gave	 birth	 to	 a	 beautiful	 boy.	 As	 the	 boy	 was	 born	 on	 a	 dark	 and	 thunderous
monsoon	night,	he	was	named	Meghanada,	‘the	one	with	a	thunderous	voice’.
Soon,	 Prince	 Kumbakarna	fathered	a	beautiful	girl	baby	and	 Vibhishana
also	became	the	father	of	a	healthy	and	robust	girl	baby.	All	these	events	were
important	 for	 us,	 not	 because	 we	 were	 concerned	 about	 royal	 fecundity,	 but
because	 they	 attracted	 people	 from	 the	 countryside	 of	 both	 the	 island	 and	 the
mainland,	and	that	was	good	for	business.	Slowly	and	steadily,	the	King	earned
the	goodwill	of	the	people.	Perhaps,	he	had	curbed	his	natural	ambition	or	the
birth	of	a	son	had	quenched	his	thirst	for	war	and	acquisition	of	new	territory.
Slowly	the	territories	of	India,	including	the	island,	started	to	regain	the

prosperity	it	had	once	enjoyed.	Trade	began	to	flourish	again.	The	surprising
thing	was	that	people	who	I	had	thought	were	impossibly	cruel,	proved	to	be
excellent	 administrators.	 Rudraka’s	 move	 to	 post	 policemen	 and	 mounted
guards	on	the	highways	and	at	ports,	was	initially	resented	by	the	people,	for
they	 thought	 these	 guards	 would	 turn	 oppressors	 and	 thieves.	 But	 Rudraka
instilled	 such	 fear	 into	 his	 subordinates,	 and	 underlined	 that	 fear	 by	 publicly
executing	corrupt	guards,	that	extortion	came	to	virtual	standstill,	at	least	in	the
vicinity	 of	 the	 capital.	 Prahastha,	 as	 a	 Prime	 Minister,	 kept	 the	 entire	 crew	 of
ministers	 under	 tight	 control	 and	 his	 personal	 integrity	 was	 respected	 by	 the
people,	though	as	a	person	he	was	never	well	liked.	Jambumali,	the	bumbling
clerk,	 matured	 into	 a	 mature	 minister	 of	 finance.	 Though	 we	 did	 not
understand	 a	 thing	 about	 his	 taxation	 policies,	 the	 rich	 merchants	 who
frequented	my	laundry,	always	sang	paeans	to	him.	He	must	have	been	really
good	 as	 these	 Chettis	 were	 usually	 as	 stingy	 with	 their	 praise	 as	 with	 their
money.
Maricha	 was	 the	 minister	 in	 charge	 of	 hospitals,	 educational	 and
charitable	institutions,	and	was	well	liked	by	the	populace.	The	kindheartedness
of	the	man	even	during	turbulent	times	had	been	notable,	so	in	peaceful	times,
he	excelled.	He	personally	visited	orphanages	and	hospitals	and	was	firm	and
kind	at	the	same	time.	He	started	a	school-cum-orphanage	for	the	children	of
soldiers	who	had	laid	down	their	lives	for	Ravana’s	greater	glory.	Though	it
was	 a	 small	 thing,	 the	 very	 thought	 that	 a	 minister	 cared	 for	 the	 poor	 and
downtrodden	and	that	the	government	was	grateful	to	those	who	had	died,	was
refreshing	and	almost	made	the	State	seem	humane.
The	 King’s	 father-in-law	 was	 the	 minister	 of	 civil	 planning	 and
administration	and	the	subject	of	much	ridicule.	He	drew	plans	of	grand	cities
and	majestic	roads	such	as	no	one	had	ever	seen	or	thought	could	be	built.	No
one	 took	 him	 seriously.	 No	 one	 believed	 him	 but	 he	 was	 tolet	 he	 wasrated
despite,	or	perhaps	because	of,	his	good-natured	blundering	and	absent-minded
ways.	He	could	be	seen	walking	through	the	highways	and	streets,	mumbling	to
himself,	 followed	 by	 two	 or	 three	 reverent	 students	 from	 his	 institute	 on	 the
mainland,	occasionally	stopping	to	draw	complicated	diagrams	in	the	mud.
Often,	 street	 urchins	 collected	 around	 this	 curious	 group.	 But	 the	 good
natured	 professor	 was	 too	 involved	 in	 his	 own	 world	 of	 complicated
mathematical	 calculations	 to	 even	 know	 these	 urchins	 existed.	 Sometimes,	 he
would	 just	 ruffle	 the	 dirty	 hair	 of	 some	 foul-smelling	 urchin	 and	 continue
mumbling	to	himself	and	drawing	imaginary	pictures	in	the	air,	ignoring	the

hoots	 of	 the	 crowd.	 He	 was	 tolerated	 by	 the	 people	 as	 a	 welcome	 and	 comic
diversion.	 That	 was	 until	 the	 King	 gave	 him	 the	 commission	 to	 build	 the
majestic	 temple	 at	 Gokarna,	 at	 the	 northernmost	 tip	 on	 the	 west	 coast	 of	 his
empire.	Anyone	who	saw	the	temple,	ceased	forever	to	ridicule	the	bumbling
professor.	It	was	a	wonderful	piece	of	art.	It	stood	on	the	shore	where	the	sea
breathed,	as	if	a	jewel	had	fallen	from	heaven,	exquisite	and	majestic.	But	that,
of	course	was	much	later.
Initially,	Vibhishana	was	well	liked.	His	attempts	to	revamp	the	forgotten
street	 Shiva	 temples	 or	 those	 of	 other	 lesser	 gods,	 and	 his	 streamlining	 of
temple	administration,	drew	many	admirers.	But	soon	he	began	to	commission
small	 Vishnu	 temples	 and	 introduce	 strange	 Deva	 customs.	 He	 even	 brought
some	Brahmins	and	slowly,	these	people	began	to	introduce	the	wretched	Deva
tradition	 of	 the	 caste	 system.	 Of	 course,	 there	 were	 idiots	 who	 admired
Vibhishana	 and	 these	 people	 quickly	 adopted	 Brahminical	 customs.	 The	 elite
began	to	 convert	in	 droves	and	wore	the	 sacred	thread	which	a	Brahmin	was
supposed	 to	 wear	 always.	 They	 began	 to	 look	 down	 on	 anyone	 who	 did	 a
useful	job.
Initially	 it	 was	 funny,	 as	 these	 new	 converts	 to	 Brahmanism	 went	 to
ridiculous	 lengths	 to	 avoid	 bodily	 contact	 with	 all	 others.	 Rowdy	 elements
among	 us	 would	 rush	 and	 embrace,	 or	 at	 least	 touch,	 the	 pure	 Brahmins
returning	from	their	purifying	baths.	No	sooner	did	one	of	us	touch	one	of	the
super-pure	Brahmins,	the	entire	bunch	would	curse	us	and	amidst	our	laughter
and	fun,	would	return	to	the	Ghat	to	wash	us	off	their	bodies.	Many	a	day	we
had	lots	of	fun	making	them	bathe	more	than	a	dozen	times.
But	then,	the	dimwitted	idiots	that	we	were,	it	was	much	too	late	when	we
found	ourselves	excluded	from	the	mainstream.	There	was	a	secret	campaign
led	 by	 prince	 Vibhishna,	 to	 reserve	 all	 important	 government	 jobs	 for
Brahmins.	Within	three	years,	almost	all	important	trade	jobs	were	in	the	hands
of	either	the	neo-converts	or	the	Brahmins	who	had	migrated	from	the	north.
Resentment	 built	 up.	 Fat	 and	 fair	 Deva	 Brahmins	 started	 arriving	 in	 hoards
from	northern	India	and	soon	Brahmin	colonies	sprang	up	in	important	towns
and	villages.
Merchants	who	did	not	accept	the	Deva	ways	were	slowly	excluded	from
the	 palace.	 Roads	 and	 other	 public	 contracts	 for	 temples,	 got	 allotted	 only	 to
the	 neo-converts.	 Then	 the	 roads	 were	 closed	 to	 people	 like	 us.	 My	 shop
witnessed	 angry	 and	 impotent	 resentment	 against	 the	 way	 things	 were	 being
done	 in	 our	 own	 land.	 The	 grand,	 new	 temples	 which	 had	 been	 constructed,

were	barred	to	us.	The	old	priests	were	thrown	out	of	temples	and	filled	hastily
by	Brahmins.	People	spoke	longingly	of	the	rule	of	Mahabali,	when	everyone
was	treated	as	equal.	Dust	accumulated	over	past	glory.
The	suppressed	resentment	finally	exploded.	It	happened	when	a	butcher
was	 negotiating	 the	 price	 of	 an	 old	 cow	 with	 a	 farmer	 in	 the	 market.	 Maha
Shivaratri	was	two	days	away	and	the	market	was	crowded	with	people	jostling
for	their	holiday	purchases.	People	were	purchasing	cows,	chickens	and	goats
to	 sacrifice	 and	 feaifice	 anst	 on.	 There	 were	 fat	 Brahmin	 missionaries
exhorting	people	to	desist	from	eating	cows.	When	the	butcher	purchased	the
cow	from	the	farmer,	a	group	of	Brahmin	priests	came	up	to	him	and	exhorted
him	to	leave	the	cow	alone.	One	suggested	that	the	butcher	would	rid	himself
of	all	his	sins	by	simply	gifting	the	cow	to	a	Brahmin.	Initially,	the	butcher	was
amused	 and	 argued	 with	 the	 Brahmins	 about	 their	 love	 for	 a	 lowly,	 stupid
animal.	 The	 butcher,	 already	 drunk,	 hugged	 the	 leader	 of	 the	 Brahmins.	 The
group	of	Brahmins	fell	on	the	butcher	and	began	to	kick	and	hit	him.
Meanwhile,	 the	 butcher	 had	 taken	 out	 his	 knife	 and	 started	 to	 slash
indiscriminately.	Soon	many	people	had	joined	the	fight	and	ended	only	when
the	 Brahmins	 took	 flight.	 Three	 Brahmins	 and	 the	 farmer	 lay	 dead	 in	 the
middle	of	the	market.	The	butcher,	in	his	new	found	heroism,	wielded	his	knife
like	a	sword	and	shouted,	“Death	to	all	Brahmins”.	The	crowd	roared	approval.
Soon,	people	came	out	with	anything	they	could	lay	their	hands	on	–	swords,
kitchen	 knives,	 tills,	 axe,	 pieces	 of	 furniture,	 stones	 –	 and	 the	 group	 had
swelled	to	hundreds	by	the	time	they	reached	my	shop.	I	also	rushed	to	join	in.	I
wanted	blood.	I	wanted	to	spit	on	the	fat	Brahmin	faces.	This	was	my	country,
my	race,	my	King,	and	how	dare	they	come	and	spoil	our	culture?
The	crowd	snaked	towards	the	streets	where	the	Brahmins	lived	in	their
fine	houses.	Somebody	found	a	torch	and	soon,	one	by	one,	the	houses	went	up
in	flames.	Women	and	children	ran	out.	The	crowd	butchered	the	children	and
took	the	women.	The	fat	Brahmins	escaped,	leaving	the	women	and	children	to
our	 mercy.	 And	 mercy	 was	 a	 word	 the	 Deva	 raids	 had	 taught	 us	 to	 discard.
When	we	were	finished,	somebody	shouted	for	Prince	Vibhishana’s	blood.	The
mob	turned	towards	the	palace.	Many	Brahmins	had	hidden	there.	We	wanted	to
punish	 them	 for	 their	 arrogance,	 pride,	 the	 insults	 they	 heaped	 on	 us,	 for
treating	us	as	untouchables	and	destroying	the	little	dignity	we	possessed.	The
mob	 swelled	 to	 thousands	 and	 we	 destroyed	 indiscriminately,	 torching	 six
Vishnu	temples,	the	public	bathing	Ghat,	shops	belonging	to	both	Asuras	and
Brahmins,	and	kept	marching	to	the	palace.	A	group	of	mounted	police	tried	to

stop	us,	but	the	mob	devoured	them	in	seconds.	An	inspector	 was	hung	from
the	 nearest	 tree.	 Three	 police	 outposts	 were	 torched.	 We	 were	 on	 a	 high.	 But
something	troubled	me.	‘Why	was	Ravana’s	army	succumbing	so	easily?	Why
was	there	was	no	resistance?	Were	they	so	cowardly?’
Then	 my	 neighbour	 fell.	 An	 arrow	 had	 pierced	 his	 throat	 and	 blood
spurted	on	the	row	of	people	behind	him.	Soon	it	started	raining	arrows	and	I
watched	 in	 horror.	 Thousands	 of	 mounted	 archers	 galloped	 towards	 us.	 The
palace	 gates	 opened	 and	 the	 soldiers	 swarmed	 on	 us	 like	 bees.	 I	 could	 see
Rudraka	 leading	 the	 charge,	 his	 sword	 swinging	 in	 all	 directions,	 severing
heads.	The	mob	panicked.	I	was	pushed	and	shoved	and	nearly	fell	down	to	be
trampled	by	thousands	of	hooves	and	feet.	It	was	the	hand	of	fate	that	protected
me.	 I	 jumped	 into	 a	 drain	 on	 the	 side	 of	 the	 road	 and	 crawled	 under	 a	 stone
bridge.	I	remained	under	the	stone	bridge	for	more	than	seven	hours.	When	it
was	dark,	I	crawled	out	of	my	hole.	The	whole	place	was	a	mess.	Would-havebeen	 heroes	 of	 the	 revolution	 lay	 splattered	 all	 around	 in	 their	 own	 filth	 of
severed	 limbs	 and	 flesh.	 The	 stench	 was	 unbearable.	 There	 was	 an	 eerie	 and
oppressive	silence.	The	scuffing	sounds	of	rats	nibbling	the	dead	made	it	more
frightening.
I	walked	towards	my	home.	All	along	the	road	I	could	see	houses	torched,
bodies	hanging	from	trees,	and	severed	limbs	and	heads	lying	around	like	ripe
mangoes	 in	 the	 groves	 during	 summer.	 Many	 of	 the	 areas	 where	 the	 poor
Asuras	lived,	had	already	been	flattened	by	elephants.	That	so	much	destruction
had	taken	place	in	seven	hce	in	seours	was	hard	to	believe.	At	the	turn	towards
the	river,	I	saw	the	dead	butcher	hanging	from	a	lamp	post.	He	had	led	us	into
this.	In	impotent	rage	I	rushed	towards	his	limp	body,	my	knife	in	my	hand.	I
clambered	up	the	tree	branch	from	where	he	was	hung	to	reach	for	his	face.	I
slashed	across	his	face	again	and	again	till	I	lost	some	of	my	boiled	up	rage.	I
jumped	down.	Then,	with	a	howl,	I	wiped	my	hands	on	my	dhothi,	and	then	in
the	earth,	again	and	again.	Wearily,	I	stood	up	and	walked	towards	my	home.
When	I	reached,	I	saw	Mala	under	the	tree.	She	lay	battered	and	beaten,	naked
and	gang-raped,	breathing	heavily.	Where	my	house	and	shop	had	stood,	there
was	a	gaping	hole	in	the	ground.	Thin	spirals	of	smoke	lazily	rose	towards	the
heavens.

35	The	Duel
Ravana
Sleep	 eluded	 me.	 Bhadra’s	 dark,	 ugly	 face	 took	 on	 grotesque	 shapes	 in
my	mind,	sometimes	leering,	sometimes	piteously	pleading.	I	lay	twitching	on
my	sheet.	Tomorrow	I	would	send	Maricha	to	him.	Perhaps	a	few	gold	coins
would	assuage	my	guilt.	But	I	was	also	angry	and	embarrassed	by	the	man.	It
had	all	started	in	a	moment	of	weakness.	How	could	I	have	stooped	so	low?	My
conduct	had	 been	inexcusable.	But	 I	could	have	forgotten	about	it	and	got	 on
with	my	life,	but	for	this	gift	from	Shiva.	It	was	beyond	me	how	a	single	act	of
passion	could	produce	a	child,	while	my	queen	and	I	struggled	for	twelve	years
to	give	my	son,	Meghanada,	a	sibling.	Akshaya	Kumara	was	born	after	many
years,	but	Meghanada	already	had	a	half-brother	–	Athikaya.	Mandodari	knew
and	 hated	 him	 so	 much,	 that	 she	 showed	 the	 maid	 and	 her	 son	 extreme
kindness.	 A	 few	 minutes	 in	 the	 darkness,	 anger	 at	 my	 wife,	 my	 race,	 and	 my
life	–	that	is	all	that	it	had	taken	to	make	this	creature	of	darkness	–	Athikaya.
I	could	have	made	both	mother	and	son	vanish	at	my	royal	command.	But
something	 held	 me	 back	 –	 perhaps	 some	 humanity	 remained	 within	 me.	 Or
maybe	 it	 was	 the	 memory	 of	 a	 long	 lost	 love	 and	 a	 small	 baby	 floating	 in	 a
reed	 basket	 over	 a	 swiftly	 flowing	 river	 –	 or	 maybe	 it	 was	 the	 memory	 of	 a
long	lost	love	and	a	small	baby	girl	fished	out	of	a	ditch	by	a	Deva	King.	After
all,	 Athikaya,	 black	 and	 ugly,	 with	 buck	 teeth,	 was	 also	 my	 son,	 and	 I	 had
become	older	and	wiser,	or	was	too	foolish,	to	commit	such	heinous	acts.	Like
my	 daughter	 in	 the	 northern	 Deva	 lands,	 the	 son	 of	 my	 sin	 too,	 grew	 up
quickly.
It	was	true	that	I	had	not	been	paying	attention	to	day-to-day	governance.
My	 ministers	 were	 efficient	 and	 I	 was	 immersed	 in	 family	 life.	 My	 coffers
overflowed	and	I	had	no	ambition	left	for	any	conquests.	I	was	in	my	fifties	and

content.	I	knew	I	was	a	good	King	and	that	people	would	talk	about	my	regime
long	 after	 I	 was	 dead.	 Like	 most	 rulers	 in	 their	 middle	 age,	 I	 was	 more
interested	in	leaving	behind	a	legacy.	Death	did	not	seem	so	distant	now.	I	could
feel	its	breath	on	my	neck.	I	was	no	longer	invincible	or	immortal.	Strangely,	I
had	 begun	 to	 value	 life.	 I	 relished	 every	 moment	 and	 the	 little	 things	 like	 the
pealing	 of	 a	 distant	 temple	 bell;	 the	 clang	 of	 swords	 as	 my	 beloved	 son,
Meghanada,	 practiced	 his	 swordplay;	 my	 wife	 cooing	 to	 my	 younger	 son,
Akshaya	Kumara;	the	tinkle	of	bangles	as	my	teenaged	niece,	Trijata,	fluttered
around	the	sweeping	verandahs	of	the	palace.	.	.the	small	pleasures	of	life	gave
me	so	much	joy.
In	the	centre	of	controversy	was	Athikaya,	my	son	from	the	maid	Mala.	I
loved	 Meghanada	 more	 than	 anything	 else	 in	 the	 world,	 even	 more	 than
myself.	 Whatever	 Meghanada	 was,	 Athikaya	 was	 not.	 Meghanada	 was	 so
handsome	that	it	hurt	my	eyes.	Athikaya	was	a	huge	hulk	of	black	flesh,	so	ugly
that	people	gaped	at	him	open-mouthed.	Where	Meghanada	was	as	graceful	as
a	pure	bred	horse,	Mala’s	son	was	clumsy	and	bow-legged.	Meghanada	exuded
intelligence	and	charm,	while	Athikaya	surpassed	himself	day	by	day	with	his
own	 stupidity.	It	was	as	if	nature	had	blessed	Meghanada	 with	 everything	and
had	nothing	left	to	offer	Athikaya.	It	puzzled	me	that	the	same	father	could	sire
sons	who	were	so	different.
I	 hated	 Athikaya	 as	 much	 as	 I	 loved	 Meghanada.	 But	 the	 cursed	 son
followed	me	like	a	puppy.	However	I	tried	to	avoid	him,	he	somehow	attached
himself	to	me.	Often	I	was	cruel	to	him,	kicking	him	or	slapping	him	in	public,
or	 shouting	 at	 him,	 yet	 he	 would	 grin	 stupidly,	 showing	 off	 his	 ugly	 yellow
buck	teeth.	Meghanada,	if	he	was	around,	would	laugh	aloud.	Athikaya	amused
him.	 It	 had	 not	 occurred	 to	 me	 when	 I	 was	 younger,	 but	 I	 had	 come	 to
recognize	that	I	loved	this	stupid	son	of	mine	in	a	different	way.	It	wasn’t	like
the	love	I	had	for	Meghanada,	or	Mandodari,	or	my	brothers,	or	my	scores	of
nieces	and	nephews.	It	was	more	like	how	one	loved	a	street	dog	you	fed	once
in	a	while	but	would	never	keep	as	a	pet	because	of	its	ugliness	and	smell.
Had	it	not	been	for	Bhadra,	I	would	perhaps	have	got	rid	of	the	boy	long
before.	Bhadra	came	back	to	me	when	I	had	grown	too	important	to	think	of
people	 like	 him.	 It	 happened	 after	 that	 pogrom,	 when	 Vibhishana	 crushed	 the
Asura	rebellion	against	the	fat	Brahmins.	I	was	no	fan	of	the	Brahmins	and	was
secretly	happy	about	the	riot.	When	Vibhishana	came	back	to	court	with	scores
of	bleeding	and	battered	Brahmins,	my	first	instinct	was	to	laugh.	But	as	usual,
it	was	Prahastha	who	showed	me	the	way.	He	was	in	his	late	fifties	then.	But	he

continued	 to	 irritate	 me	 with	 his	 discourses.	 We	 had	 our	 arguments	 but	 I	 had
begun	 to	 depend	 on	 him.	 I	 let	 him	 handle	 the	 mundane	 affairs	 of	 day-to-day
governance,	 but	 on	 important	 occasions,	 I	 used	 my	 veto	 power.	 We	 were	 not
exactly	friends,	but	 I	respected	the	old	man.	 He	was	one	of	the	few	men	who
were	 not	 afraid	 of	 me	 and	 certainly	 no	 sycophant.	 True	 to	 form,	 instead	 of
arguing	with	me	in	front	of	the	other	ministers	on	the	day	of	the	rebellion,	he
requested	a	recess	and	came	to	me	quietly	and	told	me	that	this	was	the	chance
we	had	been	waiting	for.	We	had	to	crush	the	rebellion	with	full	force	so	that
no	 Asura	 got	 any	 ideas	 about	 taking	 the	 law	 into	 his	 own	 hands.	 The	 KingEmperor	was	supreme	and	only	his	writ	should	run,	Prahastha	argued.
Since	I	was	the	King-Emperor,	I	had	no	problems	accepting	what	he	said.
But	I	was	uneasy	about	supporting	the	Brahmins.	Then	it	struck	me	that	I	could
kill	 two	 birds	 with	 one	 stone.	 So	 we	 let	 the	 city	 burn	 for	 a	 few	 hours	 and
allowed	the	hooligans	to	do	their	job	with	the	Brahmin	ladies.	Then	we	struck
back.	My	soldiers,	with	perfect	impartiality,	hacked	off	the	heads	of	Brahmins
and	 Asuras	 alike.	 I	 let	 my	 soldiers	 loot	 the	 Vishnu	 temples.	 They	 did	 so	 with
gusto	 and	 converted	 them	 into	 Shiva	 temples.	 The	 Brahmins	 fled	 in	 hoards
towards	the	mainland	and	Varuna	ferried	them	across,	always	charging	a	hefty
fee.	Varuna	could	make	a	profit	whatever	the	circumstances.	Rudraka	did	such
a	thorough	job	that	I	never	faced	another	rebellion.	It	was	true	that	Vibhishana
sulked	for	a	while,	but	that	mattered	little	to	anyone.	However,	I	felt	sorry	for
my	brother	and	pacified	him	saying	that	I	would	not	harass	the	Brahmins	who
had	managed	to	remain.	Slowly	he	came	around	and	I	thought	I	had	contained
my	little	brother ’s	idiosyncrasies.	Or	that	was	what	I	thought	then.
When	Bhadra	came	to	me,	I	sensed	he	was	seething.	I	could	also	sense	his
helplessness.	 Suppressed	 frustration	 lay	 coiled	 inside	 him.	 But	 then,	 Bhadra
was	 always	 that	 way.	 He	 stood	 and	 stared	 at	 me.	 I	 was	 amused.	 He	 appeared
when	I	least	expected	him,	when	I	was	looking	at	my	garden	from	the	balcony,
drinking	 in	 the	 smell	 of	 jasmine,	 listening	 to	 the	 cooing	 of	 the	 pigeons,
unmindful	 of	 the	 bloodbath	 taking	 place	 outside	 my	 secluded	 palace
unconsciously,	my	hands	went	to	my	sword.	Like	a	small	child	I	had	named	it
ChandraÀed	 it	 Chhasa	 and	 was	 extremely	 possessive	 about	 it.	 It	 was	 a
masterpiece	created	by	a	famed	blacksmith	and	never	left	my	side.
Then,	 inexplicably,	Bhadra	 began	to	weep.	His	 cries	came	in	fits	at	first
and	then	his	whole	body	shook	with	his	torment.	He	collapsed	onto	his	knees
and	 then	 fell	 outstretched	 at	 my	 feet.	 In	 earlier	 times,	 in	 a	 similar	 situation,	 I
would	have	kicked	his	face.	I	could	not	stand	weakness	in	anyone.	But	I	saw	that

Bhadra	 did	 not	 weep	 from	 weakness	 but	 for	 his	 survival.	 It	 took	 courage	 to
lose	 your	 pride	 and	 still	 survive.	 It	 took	 will	 power	 to	 suppress	 one’s
screaming	 ego	 and	 grovel	 before	 another	 man.	 It	 took	 determination	 to	 keep
one’s	 head	 down	 and	 act	 humble,	 when	 you	 were	 seething	 inside.	 Ultimately,
the	 victories	 do	 not	 matter,	 nor	 pride	 or	 glory,	 only	 survival	 matters	 –	 one’s
life	and	successors,	the	clan,	race	and	language.	Other	things	were	useless.	But
then	I	was	what	I	was	and	he	was	what	he	had	become.	Neither	of	us	could	do
anything	about	it.	So	I	leaned	down	and	helped	him	up.
“Bhadra.”	I	looked	into	his	coal	black	eyes.	A	flicker	of	hate	came	like	a
flash	 and	 went,	 to	 be	 replaced	 by	 a	 dead	 expression.	 I	 ignored	 the	 hate.	 I
ignored	 the	 stench.	 Life	 was	 too	 short	 for	 such	 things.	 I	 almost	 felt	 noble.
“Have	 you	 eaten?”	 I	 asked,	 with	 what	 I	 imagined	 was	 kindness.	 He	 shook	 his
head.	“Go	to	the	kitchen	and	eat.	I	will	send	instructions.”
He	still	stood	there.	It	was	an	awkward	 situation.	He	did	not	speak	and	I
had	run	out	of	words.	His	stench	was	overpowering.	I	tried	to	keep	the	kindness
and	pity	I	felt	for	the	creature	intact,	but	found	revulsion	creeping	in.	I	fought
against	it,	keeping	my	eyes	away	from	his	black,	cracked	skin,	disheveled	and
matted	hair,	the	sores	on	his	legs,	the	protruding	 belly	and	 unclean	teeth.	But
the	 smell	 kept	 coming	 back.	 I	 wanted	 to	 wash	 my	 hands,	 it	 felt	 so	 impure.
Involuntarily,	 I	 wiped	 my	 hands	 on	 a	 silk	 handkerchief	 and	 was	 embarrassed
when	his	eye	followed	my	movements.
It	 was	 then	 that	 three-year-old	 Meghanada	 came	 running	 into	 the	 room
with	peals	of	laughter.	He	stopped	abruptly	and	his	huge,	lovely	eyes	registered
surprise	at	the	dirty,	black	Asura	standing	so	reverently	before	his	father,	the
king.	I	wanted	to	lift	my	boy	and	moved	towards	him,	but	then	I	did	not	want	to
touch	 him	 with	 the	 dirty	 hands	 that	 touched	 Bhadra.	 Once	 again	 I	 wiped	 my
hands	and	a	snigger	emanated	from	the	dirty	fellow.	Anger	rose	in	me	like	a
tidal	wave	and	I	turned	back	to	him	furiously.	It	was	then	that	my	illegitimate
son,	 the	 dark,	 ugly,	 Athikaya,	 also	 came	 running	 into	 the	 room.	 Except	 for	 a
loin	 cloth,	 he	 wore	 nothing.	 His	 three-year-old	 fingers	 were	 messy	 from	 a
half-eaten,	 ripe	 mango.	 His	 eyes	 locked	 with	 Bhadra’s.	 I	 do	 not	 know	 what
registered	 in	 the	 mind	 of	 the	 three-year-old	 but	 he	 walked	 towards	 the	 halfstarved	Bhadra	and	offered	him	the	mango.	Before	I	could	react,	Bhadra	took
it	and	sucked	it	as	though	it	was	the	last	thing	he	would	ever	eat.	Then	to	my
horror,	 Meghanada	 extended	 his	 little	 hands	 and	 Bhadra	 stopped	 eating	 and
dropped	the	half-sucked,	messy	mango	into	them.	I	kicked	the	hands	hard	and
the	mango	shot	out	of	the	balcony.	I	struck	Bhadra	with	the	back	of	my	hand.

All	my	altruism	vanished.	‘How	dare,	this	lowly	one	come	into	my	palace	and
have	 the	 prince	 eat	 his	 leftovers?’	 Bhadra	 fell	 down	 with	 an	 expression	 of
glum	 satisfaction.	 I	 wanted	 to	 wipe	 it	 off	 his	 ugly	 face	 with	 a	 swipe	 of	 my
sword.
The	 two	 boys	 howled.	 I	 took	 Athikaya	 by	 his	 shoulders	 and	 shook	 him
hard.	 Meghanada	 tried	 to	 free	 his	 half-brother	 from	 my	 grip.	 He	 pummelled
me	 with	 his	 little	 hands	 and	 then	 Mandodari	 came	 running	 in	 and	 pulled
Athikaya	from	my	hands.
“Ravana,	are	you	mad?	Are	you	trying	to	kill	this	child?”	she	screamed.
She	 left	 the	 howling	 Athikaya	 on	 the	 floor	 and	 pulled	 Meghanada	 to	 her.	 My
son	wept	on	hÀson	weptis	mother ’s	bosom.	Athikaya	saw	this	and	howled	all
the	more.
“Why	 do	 you	 allow	 Megha	 to	 play	 with	 this	 dirty	 urchin?”	 My	 words
sounded	hollow	even	to	me.
My	wife	glowered.	“It	is	your	dirty	urchin,	Ravana,”	she	said	and	picked
up	her	weeping	son	in	her	arms	and	stomped	out.	I	was	shocked.	‘How	dare	she
speak	to	me	like	that?’	She	used	to	be	afraid	to	even	come	near	me.	But	after	a
son	was	born,	she	acted	as	if	she	owned	me.	She	was	not	afraid	anymore.	She
was	not	afraid	to	call	me	by	my	name	or	scream	at	me	and	throw	tantrums	to
get	her	way.	I	had	mellowed,	except	for	the	occasional	flare	of	temper.	Some
could	 say	 I	 was	 henpecked.	 Though	 I	 hid	 it	 with	 my	 acts	 of	 belligerence	 and
shouting,	she	got	her	way	most	of	the	time.	She	used	my	love	for	her	and	my
son	as	tools	to	control	me,	and	quite	truthfully,	I	was	happy.
It	took	a	few	seconds	to	register	that	there	was	no	noise.	I	looked	around.
Athikaya	and	Bhadra	had	vanished,	leaving	me	alone.	I	went	to	the	balustrade
and	looked	down.	I	could	see	a	limping,	dark,	figure	holding	the	tiny	hand	of	a
dirty	 urchin,	 walking	 towards	 the	 kitchen	 block.	 A	 pleasant	 breeze	 came	 in
from	 the	 sea	 and	 carried	 whiffs	 of	 their	 conversation.	 Tangled	 in	 their
laughter,	 a	 word	 shot	 out	 like	 a	 dart	 and	 struck	 a	 soft	 spot	 in	 my	 heart.
Athikaya,	the	son	I	had	never	wanted,	in	his	innocent	voice,	called	Bhadra	his
‘father ’.	I	did	not	know	whether	Bhadra	had	asked	the	child	to	call	him	so	or
whether	the	boy	felt	like	doing	so.	But	it	hurt	me.	I	recovered	when	I	thought
that	the	ugly	urchin	would	be	out	of	my	hair	and	away	from	my	beloved	son,
Meghanada.
Though	everyone	knew	 Athikaya	was	my	son,	it	helped	that	Bhadra	had
married	 the	 maid	 I	 had	 raped	 so	 long	 ago.	 So	 there	 was	 some	 sort	 of
legitimacy	 to	 Athikaya	 and	 Bhadra’s	 relationship.	 It	 had	 embarrassed	 me	 to

know	I	had	raped	my	servant’s	wife	and	given	a	child	to	that	family,	but	I	got
used	to	the	embarrassment.	One	can	get	used	to	anything,	even	embarrassment.
As	a	special	concession,	I	allowed	the	royal	instructors	to	teach	Athikaya	also,
after	their	lessons	to	the	Princes.	And	I	was	surprised	to	hear	that	he	was	a	fast
learner	 in	 the	 use	 of	 arms.	 He	 must	 have	 inherited	 it	 from	 me.	 I	 thought	 he
could	be	developed	as	a	reasonably	good	combat	companion	for	my	son.
It	 was	 with	 great	 pride	 that	 I	 announced	 the	 graduation	 of	 my	 son,
Meghanada.	 It	 was	 fixed	 for	 the	 full	 moon	 day	 of	 Shravan.	 My	 close	 friend
Bali,	 was	 the	 state	 guest	 for	 the	 function.	 After	 the	 fiasco	 of	 my	 youth,	 our
friendship	had	grown	and	I	admired	Bali	and	believed	the	respect	was	mutual.
His	 wife	 Tara,	 and	 my	 queen,	 were	 good	 friends.	 Both	 Bali	 and	 I	 had	 errant
brothers	and	that	was	a	much	discussed	topic	between	us.	Bali	kept	a	watchful
eye	on	my	amoral	sister,	who	had	settled	on	the	outskirts	of	his	kingdom.	He
would	say	that	she	would	bring	disaster	to	everyone	because	she	was	so	selfcentered,	 but	 I	 ignored	 him,	 thinking	 Soorpanakha	 too	 insignificant	 to	 create
an	impact.	She	needed	men	and	she	took	them	indiscriminately.	She	was	a	blot
on	the	family,	but	as	long	as	she	and	my	mother	and	my	sly	father	kept	away
from	Lanka,	I	cared	nothing	about	what	people	said.
Bali	was	at	the	height	of	his	glory	when	he	visited	Trikota	for	my	son’s
graduation.	 His	 own	 son,	 Angada,	 a	 few	 years	 older	 than	 Meghanada,
accompanied	 him.	 The	 boy	 was	 a	 bit	 of	 a	 rebel	 teenager	 but	 which	 teenager
with	 spirit	 did	 not	 rebel?	 I	 felt	 my	 friend	 was	 a	 bit	 too	 harsh	 on	 his	 son.
Children	needed	space	to	grow	and	it	was	difficult	when	their	father	was	a	huge
Banyan	tree.	Nothing	could	grow	beneath	it.	The	boy	was	silent	and	brooding
and	 many	 times	 was	 openly	 hostile	 to	 his	 strict	 father.	 Compared	 to	 Angada,
my	son	was	an	angel.	Actually,	my	son	was	an	angel	compared	to	anyone.	I	was
always	afraid	of	his	friendship	with	Angada,	but	Meghanada	stÀ	Meghanaood
up	for	the	rights	of	the	weak.	I	thought	this	was	rather	unsuited	to	the	modern
age	we	lived	in.	My	son	had	the	old-fashioned	notions	and	morals	of	a	bygone,
classical	 age.	 Secretly,	 I	 was	 afraid	 for	 his	 future.	 But	 he	 always	 argued
passionately	 that	 people	 were	 basically	 good	 and	 noble	 and	 that	 all	 men,
irrespective	 of	 caste,	 race	 or	 religion,	 were	 equal.	 Values,	 truth,	 morals	 and
right	 conduct,	 were	 eternal	 and	 no	 progress	 made	 by	 mankind	 could	 change
them.	I	was	proud	and	worried	at	the	same	time.
Unfortunately,	 I	 was	 proved	 right.	 Poor	 boy,	 what	 did	 he	 know	 about
blue-skinned	 imposters	 who	 played	 God	 and	 justified	 despicable	 acts	 with
obscure	Sanskrit	blabberings?	What	did	he	know	of	the	treachery	of	brothers

and	 friends,	 about	 hypocrisy,	 the	 ugly,	 dog-eat-dog	 world?	 Of	 course,	 I	 too
had	 fantastic	 notions	 of	 changing	 the	 world	 and	 creating	 a	 great	 and
prosperous	 society	 when	 I	 was	 his	 age.	 But	 then	 I	 grew	 up	 and	 out	 of	 such
dreams.	Meghanada	was	showered	with	luxury	whereas	the	only	thing	I	had	at
that	age	was	hunger.
But	I	am	digressing.	The	jackals	have	left	me	alone	for	now.	Why	do	they
not	 eat	 my	 feverish	 brain	 and	 put	 an	 end	 to	 this?	 There’s	 so	 much	 I	 have	 to
remember.	 Oh	 Shiva,	 please	 call	 me	 to	 your	 abode.	 That	 is,	 if	 you	 actually
exist.	I	will	soon	know.	But	the	images	keep	coming	to	me,	so	many	of	them.
Prominent	 among	 them	 is	 the	 venue	 of	 my	 son’s	 graduation.	 I	 could	 see	 the
glum	 satisfaction	 on	 Mandodari’s	 face.	 I	 knew	 it	 was	 not	 because	 of	 her
handsome	 son,	 his	 glorious	 looks	 and	 dark	 flying	 mane	 as	 he	 rode	 past	 our
seats,	 or	 the	 graceful	 way	 he	 held	 his	 bow	 and	 shot	 arrows	 at	 birds	 and	 fish
while	swiftly	riding	past	them	on	horseback.	She	was	proud	her	son	had	turned
out	 better	 than	 that	 of	 her	 friend,	 Tara.	 Her	 son	 was	 much	 better	 than	 my
illegitimate	son,	Athikaya.	I	felt	proud	too	but	Mandodari	looked	as	if	she	had
won	the	race	of	parenthood.	When	did	parents	become	so	competitive?
It	 was	 then	 that	 one	 of	 the	 most	 embarrassing	 incidents	 of	 my	 life
happened.	My	son	slipped	from	his	saddle	and	the	crowd	gasped.	Angada,	who
was	seated	between	Bali	and	Tara,	howled	with	laughter.	My	son	regained	his
balance	 and	 gracefully	 continued	 his	 ride.	 I	 ignored	 the	 derisive	 laughter
though	 I	 was	 seething.	 But	 what	 ensued	 was	 disaster.	 It	 almost	 drove	 my
country	to	war	and	my	kingdom	to	destruction.	I	heard	the	sound	of	a	scuffle.
‘Asuras!	 Always	 drinking	 and	 fighting,’	 I	 thought.	 I	 turned	 to	 look	 at
commotion	and	got	the	shock	of	my	life.	Angada	lay	on	the	ground.	There	was
an	 uneasy	 silence.	 My	 son	 had	 halted	 his	 horse	 a	 few	 feet	 away.	 Behind	 our
backs,	 the	 bulky	 and	 dark	 figure	 of	 Athikaya	 rose.	 Then,	 with	 slow
deliberation,	he	scrambled	away.	‘What	had	the	idiot	done?	This	son	of	a	lowly
maid?’
“Catch	 that	 idiot!”	 I	 roared,	 and	 hundreds	 of	 guards	 drew	 their	 swords
and	surrounded	both	Angada	and	Athikaya.	Bali’s	face	had	gone	red	and	I	felt
afraid.
Athikaya	stood	with	his	thick,	black	lips	parted,	strands	of	his	curly	hair
puffing	in	the	wind,	looking	positively	bewildered.	He	looked	like	a	stupid	bull
but	 I	 could	 see	 his	 hands	 were	 tense.	 Rudraka	 walked	 towards	 Athikaya,	 his
sword	drawn.
“He.	.	.He.	.	.insulted	my.	.	.bro.	.	.I	mean.	.	.Prince	Meghanada.”	Athikaya

stammered.	 A	 murmur	 rippled	 through	 the	 crowd.	 Meghanada’s	 face	 showed
amusement	and	love.
“Throw	 him	 into	 the	 dungeon.	 We	 shall	 decide	 his	 fate	 tomorrow.”	 I
shouted,	stealing	a	look	at	the	grim	faced	Bali.
“I’ll	deal	with	him.”	It	was	Angada	who	had	scrambled	up.
“Angada.	 .	 .”	 Bali’s	 voice	 was	 chilling	 but	 his	 son	 defied	 his	 father ’s
anger.	 What	 I	 saw	 in	 his	 eyes	 was	 the	 same	 hatred	 I	 had	 for	 my	 father.	 I	 saÀ
father.nk	back	in	my	seat,	knowing	that	matters	were	getting	out	of	control.	My
only	prayer	was	that	Angada	would	finish	this	idiot	Athikaya	quickly	and	save
the	day.
“You	fool.	.	.”	Bali	hissed,	but	Angada	was	beside	himself.	He	theatrically
waved	away	all	the	guards	and	Rudraka	looked	at	me	for	instructions.	I	gave	a
curt	nod	and	he	ordered	his	guards	back.
“He	 kicked	 me	 and	 I	 want	 to	 reclaim	 my	 honour,”	 Angada	 hissed	 at	 his
father.	 Then,	 at	 the	 top	 of	 voice,	 he	 announced	 to	 the	 gallery,	 “Citizens	 of
Lanka,	watch	how	we	Vanaras	deal	with	an	ass	who	thinks	he	is	a	lion!”
Athikaya	 stood	 there	 stupidly,	 his	 eyes	 blinking	 like	 an	 owl.	 Meghanada
dismounted	and	came	to	Athikaya.	He	took	his	hands	and	whispered	something
in	 his	 ear	 and	 then	 led	 him	 to	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 venue.	 ‘Son	 of	 a	 sweeper,	 the
curse	born	to	erase	my	pride.’	I	wanted	to	kill	him	with	my	own	hands.	As	the
son	of	my	sin	walked	into	the	centre	with	my	beloved	Meghanada,	the	crowd
roared	approval.	With	that	one	gesture	by	the	prince,	Athikaya	had	become	the
gallery’s	 darling.	 Meghanada	 drew	 his	 sword	 and	 threw	 it	 to	 Athikaya	 who
caught	it	with	such	ease	in	mid-air	that	I	was	startled.	The	boy	had	flair.	Now	I
was	torn.	I	wanted	Athikaya	to	be	killed	so	that	I	could	save	my	country	and	my
friendship	with	Bali.	But	somewhere	within	me,	my	parental	pride	throbbed.	I
wanted	Athikaya	to	win.	After	all,	he	was	my	blood.
Angada	walked	in	circles.	I	could	hear	a	few	cat	calls	and	hoots.	Then	the
crowd	 began	 to	 chant,	 “Death	 to	 the	 Vanaras;	 hell	 to	 the	 Vanaras;	 hai	 hai
Vanaras.”	I	stole	a	glance	at	Bali	and	saw	his	hands	tightly	gripping	his	chair.
The	 nerves	 in	 his	 huge	 arms	 were	 taut	 and	 throbbing,	 but	 his	 face	 remained
impassive.	The	crowd	began	to	abuse	the	Vanaras,	calling	them	half-castes	and
monkey-men.	Some	abused	the	Vanara	 King	himself.	I	 searched	for	Rudraka.
But	 to	 my	 amazement,	 Rudraka	 was	 intently	 watching	 the	 start	 of	 the	 combat
with	his	back	turned	to	me.	The	noise	was	deafening.
The	first	clash	of	swords	broke	through	the	noise.	Then	they	fought	–	the
bellicose	 son	 of	 my	 friend	 and	 the	 son	 of	 a	 sweeper	 woman.	 In	 the	 first	 few

minutes,	Angada	drew	blood	many	times.	He	was	lithe	and	swift.	Athikaya	was
clumsy	at	times,	elegant	at	others,	but	he	could	not	manage	to	even	nip	Angada.
I	began	to	relax,	but	also	felt	sad.	The	crowd	had	gone	silent	and	tense.	I	could
feel	the	hostility	in	the	air.	I	could	also	sense	Bali	relaxing	a	little.	Then,	with	a
powerful	kick	in	the	groin,	Angada	send	Athikaya	flying	to	the	floor.	Athikaya
crashed	into	the	ground	with	 a	sickening	thud.	A	 huge	gasp	went	through	the
crowd.	Angada	gave	a	loud	laugh	and	roared.
Athikaya	lay	in	a	heap,	unconscious,	or	perhaps	dead.	Angada	waved	his
sword	at	the	crowd.	He	could	have	thrust	his	sword	into	Athikaya	and	finished
him	off.	But	he	did	nothing	of	the	sort.	That	would	have	been	too	tame	for	him.
He	was	relishing	the	moment	of	victory	of	a	Vanara	prince	over	an	Asura	and
wanted	to	savour	every	second	of	it.	I	could	see	the	twitch	of	a	smile	on	Bali’s
face	 and	 also	 a	 flicker	 of	 pride.	 I	 was	 sad	 but	 relieved.	 A	 crisis	 had	 been
averted.	But	then	I	saw	the	tall,	elegant	figure	of	my	son	walking	towards	his
fallen	half-brother.	Angada	stopped	his	antics	and	stared	with	open	hostility	at
my	 son.	 I	 prayed	 that	 he	 would	 not	 challenge	 Meghanada	 to	 a	 duel.	 My	 son
would	have	to	accept	and	the	result,	either	way,	would	have	been	disastrous.	As
I	 watched,	 I	 realized	 that	 my	 entire	 body	 was	 trembling.	 ‘The	 idiotic	 son	 of
Bali,	 I	 could	 murder	 him.	 Why	 could	 not	 people	 bring	 up	 their	 children
properly?’
Meghanada	 took	 Athikaya’s	 head	 onto	 his	 lap	 and	 then	 whispered
somethÀspered	sing	in	his	ear.	There	was	an	uneasy	calm.	Time	stood	still.	It
was	 a	 hot	 and	 humid	 day	 and	 even	 the	 breeze	 from	 the	 sea	 had	 stopped.
Somewhere	in	the	distance	a	goat	bleated	and	was	soon	answered	by	its	lamb.
My	 back	 was	 wet	 with	 perspiration.	 A	 murmur	 rose	 from	 the	 crowd	 as
Athikaya	 stirred.	 Then,	 with	 an	 arm	 over	 Meghanada’s	 shoulders,	 he	 slowly
tried	to	stand.	He	faltered	twice	and	was	strongly	held	up	by	Meghanada.	Then
he	pushed	Meghanada	aside	and	took	two	faltering	steps	towards	Angada.	He
steadied	 himself	 and	 gave	 a	 roar.	 It	 was	 not	 human,	 that	 roar,	 it	 reverberated
through	 the	 gallery	 and	 lost	 itself	 in	 the	 momentary	 silence.	 Then	 the	 crowd
roared	back	with	its	ten	thousand	throats.	The	sound	chilled	me.

Meghanada	 took	 a	 club	 from	 Maricha	 and	 walked	 deliberately	 to
Athikaya.	Without	looking	at	Meghanada,	his	eyes	intently	focused	on	his	rival,
Athikaya	 took	 the	 club	 in	 his	 left	 hand	 and	 passed	 it	 to	 his	 right.	 There	 he
stood,	 with	 his	 legs	 wide	 apart,	 bleeding	 from	 a	 hundred	 cuts,	 his	 huge,	 left
hand	firmly	on	his	hips,	and	his	dark,	ugly	face	scowling	at	Angada.	Angada
had	no	choice.	He	was	bound	by	honour	to	put	down	his	sword	and	fight	with
his	club.	As	he	took	the	club,	the	crowd	with	one	voice	chanted,	“Death	to	the
Vanara.	Death	to	the	monkey-man.	Hai,	hai	Vanara.”

The	 game	 changed	 altogether.	 Athikaya	 was	 clumsy	 with	 his	 sword.	 His
bulky	body	could	not	move	as	nimbly	or	as	fast	as	the	supple	Angada.	But	his
huge	 weight	 was	 an	 advantage	 in	 swinging	 the	 heavy	 club.	 Angada	 was	 still
swift	and	graceful	and	managed	to	hit	Athikaya	more	often	than	the	other	way
round.	 But	 Athikaya	 had	 such	 power	 and	 accuracy	 to	 his	 hits	 that	 the	 few	 he
connected,	injured	his	opponent.	Angada’s	style	was	to	thrust	and	dance	away,
far	from	the	reach	of	his	heavy	rival.	That	was	well	in	swordplay.	But	with	a
club,	unless	the	blow	was	heavy	and	well	aimed,	it	did	not	create	much	impact,
especially	 on	 a	 heavily-muscled	 adversary	 like	 Athikaya	 who	 went	 from
strength	to	strength	as	the	crowd	roared	for	him.
I	felt	proud	of	my	sons.	‘Did	a	half-bred	monkey-man	think	he	could	come
with	his	brute	of	a	son	and	thrash	our	warriors?’	Then	I	caught	myself.	I	was
afraid	what	would	happen	if	Athikaya	won.	I	wanted	to	remain	Bali’s	friend.	He
was	a	good	friend,	but	good	friends	were	dispensable.	Bali	was	a	strategic	ally,
who	kept	the	barbarian	Deva	hordes	of	the	upper	Gangetic	plain	at	bay.	Such
allies	were	not	dispensable.	Illegitimate	sons	were	easily	dispensed	with.	But	he
had	my	blood,	this	huge,	stupid	son	of	a	maid,	and	the	way	he	was	going,	he
could	make	Bali	my	biggest	enemy.
Angada	 fell,	 sprawled	 on	 the	 ground.	 Both	 his	 arms	 were	 broken	 and
twisted	impossibly.	Athikaya	was	bleeding	and	a	pool	of	blood	formed	under
his	left	foot.	He	kept	his	right	foot	pressed	firmly	on	the	chest	of	the	gasping
Angada.	 Bali	 stood	 up	 from	 his	 seat,	 his	 fist	 clenched	 hard	 and	 face	 taut	 and
tense.	His	queen’s	face	had	frozen	with	horror.	The	crowd	shouted	in	a	frenzy,
“Kill	 him!	 Kill	 him!	 Kill	 the	 son	 of	 the	 monkey!”	 The	 roar	 could	 be	 heard
everywhere.
Athikaya	 raised	 his	 club	 high	 above	 his	 head	 in	 an	 arc,	 the	 club	 almost
touching	his	back.	He	would	have	swung	it	with	mighty	force	and	smashed	it
down	 on	 Angada’s	 head.	 And	 Bali’s	 son	 would	 have	 had	 been	 crushed	 in	 a
second.
“Rudraka!”	 I	 shouted	 at	 the	 top	 of	 my	 voice.	 I	 was	 not	 sure	 whether	 he
heard	 or	 not.	 It	 seemed	 like	 an	 eternity,	 but	 then	 Athikaya	 turned	 his	 face
towards	me.	‘What	 was	 it	 I	 saw	 in	 those	 eyes	 –	 hatred,	 astonishment,	 pity	 or
pure	 raw	 contempt?’	 He	 stood	 for	 a	 fraction	 of	 second	 looking	 at	 me.	 The
croÀt	 me.	 Thwd	 went	 silent.	 The	 image	 remains	 frozen	 in	 my	 mind.	 Then
Rudraka	caught	my	eye	and	understood.	He	just	flicked	his	hand	and	more	than
twenty	guards	rushed	towards	the	centre.	Athikaya	stood	there,	peering	into	my
soul,	the	son	I	never	wanted,	as	twenty	men	hit	him	from	all	sides	with	clubs

and	sticks.	But	he	stood	there	like	a	huge	Banyan	tree,	unmindful	of	the	raging
monsoon	of	beatings	performing	a	death	dance.	Angada	lay	still	pinned	under
his	 huge	 foot.	 A	 dark	 figure	 darted	 from	 the	 crowd	 and	 almost	 reached
Athikaya	 before	 the	 guards.	 But	 Rudraka	 hit	 a	 powerful	 blow	 with	 the	 hilt	 of
his	sword	and	the	figure	fell.	Later	I	heard	it	had	been	the	fool	Bhadra.	He	was
stamped	 upon	 by	 the	 running	 guards,	 wriggled	 for	 a	 few	 moments,	 and	 then
was	 still.	 I	 could	 see	 Meghanada	 and	 Maricha	 trying	 to	 stop	 Rudraka.	 The
crowd	was	too	shocked	to	react.	This	was	grossly	unfair	and	I	was	afraid	how
the	 crowd	 would	 react	 once	 it	 woke	 from	 its	 stupor.	 I	 could	 hear	 Prahastha
shouting	 instructions	 to	 the	 guards,	 positioning	 them	 for	 a	 quick	 evacuation.
And	to	my	horror,	I	saw	my	own	uncle	and	my	beloved	son,	fighting	with	my
faithful	 commander	 and	 his	 troops,	 to	 save	 my	 illegitimate	 son.	 This	 was	 a
nightmare.	The	crowd	fought	with	the	guards	and	a	few	fires	began	to	crackle.
There	was	a	stampede.
Then	 I	 saw	 Bali	 running	 towards	 the	 centre.	 Maricha	 was	 fighting	 a
pitched	battle	with	Rudraka	and	Meghanada	had	almost	got	through	the	guards
when	 Bali	 hacked	 his	 way	 through	 the	 chaos.	 Meghanada	 turned	 against	 Bali
and	my	hands	went	involuntarily	to	my	sword.	But	before	I	could	do	anything,
Bali,	 with	 one	 deft	 movement	 of	 his	 hand,	 caught	 hold	 of	 Meghanada’s	 wrist
and	 pried	 away	 his	 sword.	 Then,	 with	 a	 powerful	 kick,	 he	 sent	 Rudraka
sprawling.	He	pushed	away	Meghanada	and	my	son	staggered	for	a	few	steps
and	fell	onto	his	back.	Next	was	the	turn	of	my	brave	uncle.	Bali	lifted	Maricha
and	threw	him	a	good	ten	feet	away.	The	other	guards	were	too	afraid	to	move
and	gave	way.	Athikaya	had	collapsed	over	Angada,	wheezing	hard.	Bali	lifted
the	huge	hulk	of	Athikaya	easily	in	his	hands.	‘He’s	going	to	slam	him	hard	on
the	ground.	How	dare	he	come	and	kill	my	son?’	I	thought.
The	crowd	bayed	for	Vanara	blood	and	many	broke	through	the	security
ring	and	ran	to	the	center.	I	expected	Bali	to	throw	Athikaya	down	and	finish
him	off	before	attending	to	his	son.	But,	surprising	everyone,	Bali	walked	back
with	my	son	in	his	arms	–	my	bleeding,	thrashed,	hacked,	ugly,	black	son.	And
the	crowd	fell	silent.	The	men	who	had	run	to	the	middle	to	fight,	stopped	in
their	tracks	and	watched.	Tara	sobbed	and	my	wife	joined	her.	But	then,	tears
had	welled	in	my	eyes	too.	I	wanted	to	hide	them	so	I	turned	back	and	shouted
instructions	 to	 my	 soldiers.	 But	 nobody	 listened	 to	 me.	 And	 my	 friend,	 that
noble	warrior,	the	fairest	man	I	would	ever	see	in	my	life,	Bali,	the	only	one
who	could	be	truly	called	great,	came	to	me	with	my	fallen	son	in	his	arms.	His
son	lay	there	dead	or	alive,	we	did	not	know.	But	the	man	had	the	greatness	of

heart	 to	 be	 fair.	 What	 I	 had	 done	 had	 been	 ignoble	 and	 I	 was	 ashamed.	 I,	 the
mighty	king	of	the	Asuras,	cried	that	day,	in	front	of	thousands	of	my	subjects.
I	hid	my	face	from	the	world	and	cried.	I	cried	for	my	son	Athikaya,	who	had
almost	 died;	 for	 my	 friend,	 his	 fairness	 and	 supreme	 sacrifice;	 for	 my	 son,
Meghanada;	 and	 my	 uncle,	 who	 were	 brave	 enough	 to	 stand	 against	 me	 and
Bali	for	what	was	right.	And	I	cried	for	being	such	a	scum.
They	took	Athikaya	away	to	the	court	physician,	and	that	idiot	Bhadra	too.
They	carried	away	the	son	of	my	friend	who	was	half	dead	 more	from	shame
and	 fright	 than	 from	 Athikaya’s	 blows.	 Their	 wounds	 would	 heal,	 but	 what
about	 the	 wounds	 to	 our	 hearts?	 Would	 they	 ever	 heal?	 Could	 friendship
survive	such	a	magnanimous	act	from	one	friend	to	another?	Friendship	could
survive	 betrayal,	 but	 could	 it	 survive	 such	 an	 extraordinary	 act	 of	 kindness
anÀf	kindned	great	heartedness?
The	 crowd	 dispersed	 but	 over	 the	 din	 of	 voices,	 I	 heard	 something	 that
was	a	harbinger	of	things	to	come.	That	brute	Angada	hissed	as	he	passed	his
father,	“Weakling!	I’ll	get	back	at	you…”	and	so	on,	while	Bali	stood	staring
into	the	distance	as	if	he	had	not	heard	anything.	I	saw	Queen	Tara	look	at	her
husband	 with	 unadulterated	 hate	 and	 I	 was	 afraid	 for	 my	 dear	 friend.	 At	 that
moment,	I	was	afraid	that	the	world	as	I	knew	it,	had	changed.	Our	generation
and	its	values	was	giving	way	to	a	new,	unscrupulous,	arrogant,	young	world
of	Angadas.	I	was	afraid	that	people	like	us	would	be	wiped	off	in	the	coming
days.	 Our	 values	 were	 being	 lost	 and	 life	 was	 becoming	 too	 fast	 and
unscrupulous	for	older	men	like	me.	I	was	growing	old	much	too	fast.	Slowly	I
took	my	wife’s	hand	and	walked	towards	our	chariot.	That	day	my	wife	left	me
alone	 in	 my	 own	 world	 and	 I	 curled	 inside	 my	 darkness	 like	 a	 worm.	 Early
next	day	morning,	Bali	and	Tara	left	with	their	wounded	son.	And	I	never	saw
my	friend	again.

36	A	country	thanks	its	hero
Bhadra
It	was	almost	dawn	when	they	brought	him	home,	bandaged	and	bruised.
He	 moaned	 softly	 as	 they	 came.	 Without	 a	 word,	 they	 gently	 laid	 Athikaya
down,	and	they	left	without	a	word.
Athikaya	grew	up	in	my	arms.	From	the	time	he	was	three,	he	called	me
father.	 Initially	 I	 had	 been	 horrified.	 He	 was	 a	 prince,	 though	 an	 illegitimate
one,	 and	 I	 was	 what	 I	 was.	 I	 had	 shouted	 at	 him,	 pleaded	 with	 him	 and	 even
cried,	to	stop	him	from	calling	me	so,	but	he	had	persisted.	And	in	my	heart,	I
wanted	him	to	call	me	his	father.	He	was	now	my	son.	No	king	could	lay	claim
to	him.	He	anchored	me	to	the	earth.	Together	we	explored	the	city	of	Trikota
and	the	jungles,	backwaters	and	hills	which	surrounded	it.	I	taught	him	to	use
arms.	He	was	a	prince	in	my	humble	hut.	And	he	was	my	pride,	my	future.
It	 pained	 me	 when	 he	 was	 mocked;	 when	 he	 was	 dragged	 around	 like	 a
puppy	 with	 the	 legitimate	 prince,	 that	 haughty,	 know	 all,	 Meghanada.	 But	 the
boy	carried	a	deep	affection	towards	his	half-brother.	I	was	jealous	of	it	and	of
the	 love	 he	 showed	 my	 wife,	 Mala,	 his	 mother.	 I	 tried	 to	 dissuade	 him	 from
going	to	the	palace	but	the	summons	came	often,	either	from	the	King	or	his
son.	 They	 needed	 someone	 to	 run	 around,	 to	 do	 odd	 jobs.	 He	 had	 a	 doglike
devotion	for	the	King	and	the	Prince.	He	was	such	a	simpleton,	so	innocent.	He
was	 strong	 in	 body	 but	 weak	 in	 his	 mind.	 He	 went	 out	 of	 the	 way	 to	 help
people.	But	like	other	good	natured	people	from	the	lower	rungs	of	society,	his
goodness	was	mistaken	for	naivety.
Everyone	considered	him	a	fool.	But	I	was	sure	that	behind	that	soft	and
kind	 face,	 a	 tremendous	 strength	 of	 character	 lay	 hidden.	 At	 times,	 I	 saw
glimpses	of	that	hidden	steel,	but	mostly	Athikaya	was	just	a	young,	gullible,
innocent	boy,	who	was	taken	advantage	of	by	the	cunning	people	of	the	world.

Kindness,	courage,	morals,	principles,	sympathy,	these	were	dangerous	values
to	have	for	someone	who	belonged	to	our	social	position.	It	was	unsafe	to	have
a	golden	heart	under	a	dark	skin.	Those	were	the	luxuries	of	the	rich,	the	noble,
the	 high-caste,	 the	 fair-skinned,	 which	 they	 used	 when	 it	 benefitted	 them.	 My
large-boned,	 black	 and	 ugly	 son,	 could	 do	 without	 them.	 But	 a	 bit	 of
sycophancy,	a	dash	of	cruelty,	a	willingness	to	serve	any	master	to	survive,	and
the	ability	to	hide	seething	anger	and	cower	before	those	who	were	stronger,
were	survival	tools	in	our	world.	But	I	could	never	convince	foolish	Athikaya
about	any	of	it.
The	 boy	 had	 a	 privileged	 life	 till	 now.	 Did	 the	 present	 generation
understand	the	hardships	we	had	undergone?	Even	Prince	Meghanada	has	had	a
privileged	 life	 while	 his	 father	 builtƀS	 his	 kingdom	 on	 the	 flesh,	 sweat	 and
blood	of	people	like	me	and	struggled	to	become	what	he	was	now.	Perhaps,
when	we	started,	all	of	us	had	the	same	chance.	Anybody	could	have	become
what	he	was	now.	 He	was	nothing	 more	than	 us.	 What	 did	 Ravana	 have	that	I
did	 not	 possess?	 Was	 it	 the	 quiet	 confidence	 that	 he	 was	 born	 to	 rule?	 Was	 it
plain	 luck,	 or	 because	 he	 was	 so	 ruthless	 and	 clever?	 If	 ruthlessness	 was	 the
key,	 then	 Rudraka	 possessed	 it	 more	 than	 anyone	 else.	 If	 strategic	 and	 longterm	thinking	was	the	answer,	no	one	could	match	Prahastha.	If	it	was	bravery,
then	there	were	scores	of	brave	Asuras	around	who	could	have	made	it	big.	If
charisma	was	the	most	important	factor,	then	why	didn’t	Vidyutjihva	succeed?
If	cleverness	was	important,	then	why	had	Maya	not	made	it?
I	think	it	was	the	size	of	the	dream	and	the	willingness	to	act	on	it.	Ravana
dreamt	 big	 and	 strove	 ruthlessly	 to	 achieve	 it.	 And	 he	 got	 all	 sorts	 of	 people
working	for	him	to	achieve	his	ambition.	He	crushed	many	underfoot.	He	used
fools	like	me	as	firewood	for	his	burning	ambition.	And	so	he	now	lived	in	the
palace	and	I	in	a	hut.	I	hated	Ravana	for	it.	Ravana	could	beat	my	son	to	a	pulp;
treat	 me	 like	 a	 cur;	 refrain	 from	 touching	 our	 ugly	 black,	 soiled,	 sweaty,
stinking	skin,	and	at	the	same	time	talk	loudly	about	the	equality	of	men;	and
pose	as	the	saviour	of	the	Asuras	from	Deva	torments,	but	mark	my	words,	we
the	 meek	 would	 survive	 when	 the	 kings	 of	 all	 colours,	 had	 gone.	 Despite
Ravana’s	arrogance,	patronizing	attitude	and	riches,	we	would	outlive	him.	We
may	 lick	 his	 boots;	 crawl	 on	 the	 earth	 in	 front	 of	 him	 and	 pay	 obeisance
whenever	 his	 shadow	 falls	 on	 the	 earth,	 but	 one	 day	 his	 tribe	 would	 vanish,
fighting	 his	 useless	 battles	 for	 vainglory.	 But	 we	 would	 survive	 and	 win	 the
final	war	–	of	survival.
My	 son	 stirred	 and	 let	 out	 a	 moan.	 I	 was	 shaken	 from	 my	 fantastic	 and

heroic	 mental	 flight.	 Cold	 reality	 crept	 up	 on	 me.	 What	 was	 I?	 A	 small-time
nobody	 trying	 to	 make	 a	 living,	 betrayed	 by	 his	 wife,	 saddled	 with	 her
illegitimate	son,	ruled	by	a	selfish	king.	A	poor,	hungry,	unhealthy,	and	beaten
up,	 black,	 untouchable	 rascal.	 That	 summed	 me	 up.	 And	 I	 dared	 to	 dream	 of
challenging	kings?	I	laughed	at	myself.
It	was	very	hot	and	I	was	getting	pickled	in	my	own	perspiration.	My	body
hurt	as	I	slowly	sat	up.	Hunger	gnawed	at	my	belly.	I	tried	to	stand	but	my	head
swam.	 I	 caught	 at	 the	 wall	 and	 stood	 there	 panting	 for	 a	 few	 minutes.	 Then	 I
collapsed	 and	 lay	 still.	 A	 wave	 of	 self-pity	 rushed	 over	 me	 as	 I	 gulped	 down
my	tears	and	anger.	I	turned	and	crawled	towards	the	kitchen.	I	could	see	holes
on	 the	 rough	 floor.	 There	 was	 dust	 everywhere,	 which	 I	 had	 never	 noticed
before.	I	was	so	close	to	the	floor	that	I	could	smell	it.	‘Why	couldn’t	that	damn
woman	keep	the	house	clean?’	I	was	angry	 with	 my	 wife.	‘Let	her	come	back
and	I	would	teach	her	proper	housekeeping.’
A	 large,	 black	 spider	 scurried	 away	 hastily	 as	 I	 entered	 the	 kitchen.	 I
stared	 at	 it	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 but	 realized	 that	 looks	 cannot	 kill	 spiders.	 I
crawled	to	the	hearth	and	managed	to	sit	on	the	floor	with	my	legs	spread	as	I
opened	 the	 lids	 of	 the	 pots	 and	 vessels	 one	 by	 one.	 Empty.	 Nothing.	 My
stomach	rumbled	with	hunger.	A	pot	hung	from	a	rope	in	one	corner.	Perhaps
it	 had	 curd.	 Mala	 would	 have	 kept	 it	 high	 to	 keep	 it	 safe	 from	 the	 rats.	 Or
perhaps	jaggery	or	some	other	nice	savouries.	 How	could	I	reach	it?	I	could
not	stand	up.	Then	I	laughed.	Savouries	here?	In	an	untouchable’s	house?	Some
of	Ravana’s	vanity	had	rubbed	off	on	me	too.	I	was	dreaming	too	big.
‘Where	 had	 Mala	 gone?’	 I	 heard	 the	 noise	 of	 a	 cart	 drawing	 near	 and
stopping	 in	 front	 of	 the	 house.	 Was	 the	 King	 sending	 her	 home	 in	 a	 chariot
now?	I	crawled	towarˀcrawled	ds	the	front	door.	There	were	hushed	whispers
and	 then	 a	 soft	 knock	 on	 the	 half	 closed	 door.	 I	 waited	 silently.	 A	 bejewelled
hand	 pushed	 the	 creaky	 door	 open,	 throwing	 a	 trapezium	 of	 sunlight	 on	 the
walls	 and	 floor.	 My	 son	 moaned	 again.	 A	 dusty	 breeze	 wafted	 in,	 ruffled	 the
old	clothes	in	the	corner,	and	went	out	through	the	window	opposite.	I	squinted
into	 the	 bright	 sunlight,	 and	 saw	 the	 tall	 figure	 of	 Prince	 Meghanada	 enter.	 It
was	followed	by	Maricha’s	tall,	jaunty	figure.	Two	princes	in	an	untouchable’s
humble	hut!	I	could	not	believe	it.	Involuntarily,	I	tried	to	get	up,	but	collapsed
again.
Smiling,	Maricha	came	forward	and	lifted	me	up	gently	and	placed	me	on
the	lone,	broken	chair.	I	protested	and	tried	to	stand,	but	he	gently	and	firmly
pushed	 me	 back	 into	 the	 chair.	 ‘Dear	 God,	 how	 can	 I	 be	 hospitable	 to	 these

people?’	A	prince	in	my	hut.	I	was	angry	that	they	saw	my	poverty,	my	broken
chair,	my	rags,	my	torn	bed	sheets,	my	cracked	walls	and	floors,	and	my	weak
body.	This	was	my	house	and	I	needed	some	privacy	to	hide	my	failure	from
the	 eyes	 of	 a	 cruel	 world	 lorded	 over	 by	 rich	 princes	 like	 these	 two.	 Then	 I
grew	afraid.	Had	they	come	to	take	away	my	son?	Had	the	king	decided	at	last
that	he	had	a	brave	son	in	Athikaya?	Had	my	wife	finally	deserted	me?	Was	she
living	 with	 the	 king	 as	 his	 queen	 and	 taking	 away	 her	 son	 from	 me?	 Or	 had
these	 people	 come	 to	 gloat	 over	 our	 misery?	 I	 sat	 there	 with	 a	 hundred
questions	 scrapping	 like	 wild	 cats	 in	 my	 mind.	 I	 sat	 blinking	 like	 an	 owl,
speechless.
“How	 are	 you	 Bhadra?”	 Maricha’s	 voice	 had	 lost	 none	 of	 its	 kindness.
‘Thank	 you	 sir,	 for	 the	 thrashing	 I	 received	 from	 your	 soldiers,’	 I	 wanted	 to
scream.	 But	 I	 sat	 there	 without	 a	 word.	 Meghanada	 sat	 on	 the	 bed,	 close	 to
Athikaya,	and	examined	his	wounds.	He	spoke	softly	and	Athikaya	responded
like	a	lost	puppy	which	had	finally	managed	to	find	its	master.	With	disgust,	I
thought,	‘If	Athikaya	had	a	tail,	it	would	have	been	wagging.’
“I	 know,	 Bhadra,	 we	 have	 wronged	 you.”	 Maricha	 had	 his	 hands	 on	 my
shoulder	 now	 and	 was	 so	 close	 that	 I	 could	 smell	 his	 rich	 perfume.	 I	 averted
my	eyes	–	I	could	not	stand	so	much	kindness.	I	was,	after	all,	an	untouchable,
scum	of	the	earth.	I	peered	to	see	whether,	like	Ravana,	Maricha	too	had	wiped
his	 hands	 after	 touching	 my	 black	 skin.	 No,	 he	 had	 not.	 I	 was	 disappointed.
Perhaps,	he	would	bathe	once	he	reached	his	palace.
“You	 should	 not	 think	 unkindly	 of	 our	 King,	 Bhadra.”	 I	 looked	 back	 at
him.	 Who	 was	 I	 to	 think	 anything	 and	 how	 did	 it	 matter?	 “He	 is	 the	 same
Ravana.	His	whiskers	have	turned	grey,	but	Bhadra,	he	is	the	 same	 impulsive
boy	 with	 audacious	 dreams	 and	 a	 will	 to	 achieve.	 I	 know,	 bad	 things	 have
happened	 to	 people	 like	 you.	 Though	 the	 Brahmins	 have	 been	 banished,	 the
bane	of	Brahmanism	is	slowly	creeping	into	our	society.	It	is	so	easy	to	believe
that	 one	 is	 superior	 to	 all	 others.	 I	 know	 there	 are	 people	 who	 consider	 the
poor,	 black,	 original	 Asuras,	 impure,	 and	 even	 refuse	 to	 touch	 you	 people.
They	think	that	poor	settlements	like	this	will	defile	our	beautiful	cities.	I	know,
there	are	people	who	would	like	to	banish	the	poor	like	you	out	of	the	capital,
or	 if	 possible,	 out	 of	 the	 country.	 But	 believe	 me,	 Bhadra,	 it	 is	 Ravana’s
compassion	 that	 has	 prevented	 that	 from	 happening.	 He	 feels	 for	 the	 poor.
True,	we	are	far	from	the	ideals	of	Mahabali,	in	achieving	social	equality.	That
is	 still	 a	 dream.	 But	 we	 are	 striving	 towards	 it.	 And	 he	 has	 sent	 us	 with	 a
message	that	he	will	banish	all	caste	or	varna	from	his	thoughts.	The	State	will

no	 longer	 discriminate	 among	 its	 own	 subjects.	 This	 is	 our	 solemn	 promise,
and	as	a	minister,	I	make	it	on	behalf	of	His	Majesty.ˀ	His	Maj”
What	 a	 speech!	 But	 I	 was	 not	 impressed.	 The	 old	 man	 hugged	 me	 and	 I
could	see	tears	in	his	eyes.	Perhaps	he	felt	noble	hugging	me,	touching	me,	and
talking	 about	 elevated	 ideas	 to	 me.	 Let	 him	 enjoy	 his	 moment	 of	 greatness.
Perhaps	the	years	had	hardened	me.	I	could	hear	Athikaya	sobbing	loudly.	The
poor	boy	had	been	moved.	He	was	lucky	he	still	believed	such	tall	talk.	He	had
yet	to	become	infected	with	the	malaise	that	people	of	my	generation	suffered
from	–	incurable	cynicism.	But	the	people	standing	inside	my	stinking	hole	of
a	 hut	 were	 powerful	 and	 important.	 So	 I	 kept	 up	 the	 pretence.	 I	 acted	 deeply
grateful	and	thankful.	From	the	expression	on	his	face,	I	could	see	the	old	fool
had	been	taken	in.	Poor	fool,	one	could	easily	deceive	him.	Then	my	heart	went
out	 to	 the	 old	 man.	 If	 anyone	 was	 really	 sincere	 amongst	 all	 the	 thugs	 who
were	our	ministers,	it	was	this	hard,	brown,	nut,	Maricha.	He	believed	what	he
said	and	might	have	even	 striven	to	implement	it	in	all	earnestness.	His	 King
might	do	it	for	glory.	But	whether	the	conservative	old	guards	like	Prahastha,
Jambumali,	and	the	rest,	would	allow	such	changes,	was	still	to	 be	seen.	And
even	 if	 all	 of	 them	 agreed,	 Vibhishana,	 the	 disguised	 Brahmin	 among	 the
Asuras,	 would	 see	 to	 it	 that	 such	 gestures	 were	 defeated.	 Vibhishana	 was	 an
intolerant	 fanatic.	 Even	 then,	 I	 was	 sure	 that	 one	 day	 he	 would	 sell	 the	 entire
Asura	civilization	to	the	Brahmins	and	Devas.
“As	 a	 token	 of	 goodwill,	 His	 Majesty	 has	 asked	 us	 to	 present	 this	 small
gift	to	you.	It	will	not	recompense	you	for	all	the	services	you	have	performed
or	the	privation	you	have	undergone	for	the	glory	of	our	race	and	country,	but
please	 accept	 this	 token	 from	 a	 grateful	 King.”	 Saying	 this,	 Maricha	 put	 a
reasonably	large	cloth	bundle	that	jingled	with	coins,	into	my	lap.	There	was
satisfaction	on	his	face.	He	waited	for	my	profuse	gratitude,	but	I	said	nothing.
I	just	kept	staring	down	at	the	bundle.
Meghanada	 took	 leave	 of	 Athikaya	 and	 I	 heard	 my	 son	 saying	 to	 the
Prince,	“When	you	asked	me	to	do	it	for	you,	I	forgot	everything	else.	I	would
happily	 die	 for	 you,	 Your	 Highness,	 I	 would	 die	 for	 you.”	 And	 he	 kissed
Meghanada’s	hands.	Something	inside	me	snapped.	‘The	idiot	would	die	for	the
prince?’	This	was	our	fate	–	to	toil,	to	live,	to	strive,	and	to	die,	for	the	high
and	mighty.	I	once	did	it	for	the	father	of	this	same	Prince,	and	maybe	would	be
forced	to	do	it	again.	Oh	Shiva!	Was	there	no	escape?	And	now	my	son	says	he
forgot	his	parents	and	himself	and	would	have	died	for	his	master.	Did	 these
men	boast	that	they	could	command	worms	like	us	to	die?	Did	they	think	they

could	 pursue	 their	 destiny	 by	 crushing	 a	 few	 black,	 irrelevant,	 cursed,	 puny
people	 like	 ourselves,	 under	 their	 feet	 while	 marching	 to	 glory,	 riches	 and
destiny?
I	stood	up.	My	head	swam,	but	the	anger	that	lay	coiled	inside	gave	new
strength	 to	 my	 weak	 and	 battered	 body.	 “Get	 out!	 Get	 out	 you	 bastards!”	 I
screamed.	I	threw	the	bundle	of	coins	and	it	flew	out	of	the	open	door	like	a
missile.	The	cloth	tore	open	and	spilt	its	contents	all	over	the	filthy	road	and
gutter.	I	saw	they	were	silver	coins.	I	couldn’t	even	boast	that	I	had	throw	away
gold	 coins	 for	 the	 honour	 and	 dignity	 of	 my	 people.	 Had	 they	 been	 copper
coins,	 it	 would	 have	 justified	 my	 belief	 that	 princes	 and	 noblemen	 were
miserly	and	mean	and	I	cared	nothing	for	their	presents.
But	they	were	plain	silver	coins.	They	would	not	make	me	rich	nor	were
they	small	enough	to	feed	my	deeply	held	prejudices.	Urchins	and	beggars	had
gathered,	 but	 did	 not	 dare	 to	 touch	 the	 glinting	 coins.	 The	 presence	 of	 the
Prince	 and	 a	 minister,	 and	 bawdy,	 old	 Bhadra	 shouting	 and	 creating	 a	 scene,
was	too	fascinating	to	be	distracted	even	by	silver	coins.
I	 had	 gone	 too	 far,	 so	 I	 decided	 to	 speak	 my	 mind.	 “You	 think	 you	 are
doing	me	a	ˀe	doing	great	favour	by	visiting	my	hut?	You	nearly	killed	me	and
my	 son.	 Who	 wants	 your	 coins?	 Keep	 them	 for	 yourselves.	 The	 King	 is
compassionate,	you	say,”	I	spat	for	effect.	“Does	he	know	what	it	is	like	to	be
treated	 as	 though	 one	 had	 a	 contagious	 disease?	 Does	 he	 know	 the	 pain	 of
hunger?	The	sting	of	failure?	The	throbbing	ache	of	hopelessness?	The	agony
of	 being	 homeless?	 He	 does	 not	 want	 poor,	 black	 Asuras	 to	 be	 treated	 as
untouchables,	he	wants	us	to	live	in	the	cities.	I	know	the	reason	for	that	too.
You	 noble,	 rich,	 pseudo-Brahmins	 rave	 against	 us	 being	 unclean,	 our	 black
skin,	our	smell.	.	.but	you	need	us	more	than	we	need	you.	Who	would	carry
your	rubbish	if	we	were	banished?	Who	would	sweep	your	streets,	draw	your
carts,	and	die	for	you	in	your	petty	wars?”
I	felt	cold	steel	at	my	throat.	I	stared	at	Prince	Meghanada’s	gleaming	eyes
and	was	afraid.	I	trembled	as	my	fury	fled	and	I	came	to	earth	with	a	thud.	The
horror	of	what	I	had	said	hit	me	with	brutal	force.	My	lips	trembled	and	tears
of	fear	and	helplessness	traced	their	way	over	my	burning	cheeks.	It	was	over.
The	 blade	 was	 pressed	 harder	 and	 I	 felt	 the	 warmth	 of	 blood	 trickling	 out.
Surely	I	would	die	for	my	impudence.
“Let	him	be,	Meghanada.	I	think	he	is	drunk,”	I	heard	Maricha	say.	Slowly
the	pressure	eased	from	the	sword	and	Meghanada	took	it	away	and	wiped	my
blood	 from	 its	 blade	 with	 his	 fingers	 and	 put	 the	 sword	 back	 into	 its	 sheath

without	taking	his	eyes	off	my	face.	I	shivered	and	collapsed	on	the	chair.
“Bhadra,	we’ll	leave	now.	Take	care	of	your	health	and	do	 not	drink	so
much.	You	might	lose	your	head,	literally.”	Maricha	said	with	a	smile,	but	I	saw
that	his	eyes	did	not	smile.	I	could	see	contempt	in	those	eyes.	Meghanada	went
and	hugged	the	sobbing	Athikaya.	Then	the	Prince	and	the	Minister	walked	out
into	the	sunshine.	I	heard	the	horses	being	whipped	and	the	chariot	drove	away
through	the	narrow,	uneven	street.	I	lay	there,	my	mind	blank.
Then	I	heard	the	noise	of	fighting	men.	It	did	not	register	at	first.	Then	I
realized	 they	 were	 fighting	 over	 the	 silver	 coins	 I	 had	 thrown	 outside.	 My
coins.	I	tried	to	stand	up,	lost	my	balance	and	fell	on	my	face.	Then	I	crawled
outside	 and	 jumped	 into	 the	 fray	 to	 get	 hold	 of	 my	 coins.	 Most	 of	 them	 had
vanished.	 I	 clawed	 and	 fought	 my	 way	 through.	 I	 stamped	 two	 urchins	 and
kicked	an	old	beggar	and	received	much	the	same	back,	but	I	was	past	pain.	It
was	my	money,	my	hard	earned	money.	Finally,	I	managed	to	grab	a	fistful	of
soiled	coins	from	the	gutter.	Though	many	tried	to	grab	them,	I	held	on	tightly
to	 my	 possessions	 through	 the	 kicks	 and	 blows.	 Finally,	 the	 beggars	 and	 my
neighbours	gave	up	and	went	away,	cursing	me	and	each	other.	I	slowly	got	up
from	 the	 gutter	 and	 counted	 the	 coins.	 There	 were	 twenty-one.	 Maybe	 a
hundredth	 of	 what	 had	 originally	 been	 there.	 I	 stared	 at	 the	 coins	 for	 a	 long
time.	 I	 had	 thrown	 away	 the	 chances	 that	 life	 had	 handed	 me	 many	 a	 time
before	 too.	 Perhaps	 I	 deserved	 this.	 Anyhow,	 the	 tavern	 around	 the	 corner
would	be	open	now.	There	would	be	whores	with	breasts	as	big	as	pumpkins
and	plenty	of	country	liquor.	Ah,	just	what	I	needed.	I	stumbled	towards	it	as	the
sun	set,	with	the	coins	I	had	fought	for.	A	good	drink	and	some	whoring	–	after
all,	that	was	what	life	was	about.

37	A	daughter’s	marriage
Ravana
I	had	been	receiving	disturbing	news.	I	wished	to	concentrate	on	the	mural
I	was	painting	but	somehow,	I	could	not	focus.	The	colours	and	tones	did	not
come	 through	 as	 I	 wanted.	 The	 news	 was	 disturbing	 and	 I	 wondered	 who	 I
could	share	it	with?	But	it	was	a	closely	guarded	secret.	Maricha?	No,	not	even
him.	 He	 was	 not	 at	 all	 sympathetic	 about	 that	 particular	 relationship	 and	 may
not	have	abeen	willing	to	listen	to	my	ramblings	and	self-pity.
I	 felt	 old,	 both	 in	 spirit	 and	 body.	 I	 had	 seen	 her	 once,	 many	 years	 ago.
She	would	have	been	sixteen	or	seventeen	then.	Only	Maricha	knew.	It	had	been
a	 dangerous	 mission	 and	 took	 place	 immediately	 after	 my	 son’s	 graduation.
The	 way	 I	 had	 treated	 Athikaya	 tore	 at	 my	 heart	 and	 I	 wallowed	 in	 remorse,
when	Maricha	came	and	jerked	me	out	of	it.	He	was	cruel	and	candid	and	said	I
had	no	business	to	feel	sad.	After	all,	I	was	the	one	who	had	cruelly	cast	away
my	first	born.
I	 went	 mad	 and	 reminded	 him	 that	 it	 had	 been	 his	 wise	 Council	 of
Ministers	who	had	done	that.	He	retorted	that	I	hadn’t	done	anything	after	that.
That	 stopped	me	dead	in	my	 tracks.	I	dismissed	him	haughtily	and	went	 back
into	my	shell.	I	shouted	at	my	wife	and	even	threw	Meghanada	out	of	the	room.
In	the	middle	of	the	night,	I	woke	up	in	a	cold	sweat.	I	had	seen	a	ghost.	I	would
have	laughed	if	anyone	had	said	that	there	was	a	ghost	inside	the	palace	of	the
Emperor	 of	 the	 Asuras.	 Until	 then,	 ghosts	 were	 something	 that	 lurked	 with	 a
silly	leer	in	childhood	stories.	But	that	night	I	saw	one	clearly.	It	was	a	woman
with	 a	 veil	 over	 her	 face.	 She	 looked	 familiar	 as	 she	 stood	 at	 the	 window
peering	at	me	intently.	I	couldn’t	move	a	limb.	I	could	smell	my	own	fear.	The
face	 gradually	 became	 clear	 and	 I	 wanted	 to	 touch	 Mandodari	 and	 wake	 her.
But	my	hands	would	not	move.	The	face	became	clearer	by	minute	and	I	waited

with	 horror	 and	 anticipation	 for	 the	 final	 revelation.	 An	 owl	 hooted	 in	 the
garden,	piercing	the	thick	silence.	And	in	a	wisp	of	breeze,	the	veil	fell.	It	was
Vedavathi!
My	 throat	 went	 dry.	 All	 the	 emotions	 I	 had	 buried	 in	 my	 soul	 came
rushing	back	and	lodged	in	my	throat.	Vedavathi	broke	into	hysterical	laughter.
Then	slowly,	she	dissolved	into	the	mist.	I	lay	immersed	in	my	fear.	Images	of
my	unreciprocated	love	and	the	tragedy	that	had	followed,	choked	me.	Slowly,
painfully,	I	moved	my	limbs	and	got	off	the	bed	and	searched	for	my	sandals	in
the	dark.	I	stood	for	a	while	without	any	thought	or	emotion,	watching	the	still
leaves	of	the	coconut	palms	awash	in	the	silvery	moonlight.	Then	I	knew	what	I
had	to	do.	It	started	as	a	small	thought,	but	soon	possessed	me.	I	hurried	out,
leaving	 the	 door	 open.	 I	 ignored	 the	 snoring	 guards	 and	 ran	 through	 the
corridors	to	Maricha’s	chamber.	I	banged	on	his	door,	shocking	the	guard	who
had	been	dozing	with	his	head	resting	on	the	door.	Ignoring	the	scoundrel	who
mumbled	something,	I	kept	banging	on	the	door	till	the	old	man	opened	it.	A
curse	died	on	his	lips	as	he	saw	my	face.
“We	have	to	go	now.	.	.I	have	to	see	her	now.”	I	told	him.
“Who?”
“Dress	and	come	quickly.	I	want	to	see	her	now	and	you	are	coming	with
me.”
“Who?”
I	 pulled	 him	 out	 of	 the	 room.	 The	 guard	 bowed	 with	 alacrity.	 I	 pushed
Maricha	 into	 the	 garden	 and	 said,	 “I	 saw	 her.	 .	 .Vedavathi.	 .	 .”	 I	 continued,
ignoring	 the	 confusion	 and	 shock	 in	 Maricha’s	 face,	 “I	 wish	 to	 see	 my
daughter	now.”
“Are	you	drunk?”	Maricha	struggled	out	of	my	grip.
I	stamped	my	foot	impatiently	and	asked,	“Who	keeps	the	key	to	the	large
shed?”
“Ravana,	come	to	your	senses.	You	want	to	go	Mithila	now?	To	Mithila,
deep	inside	Deva	country,	and	you	want	me	to	fly	with	you	in	your	mad	fatherin-law’s	contraption?	When	was	the	last	time	you	flew	that	thing?”
“Get	me	the	key	and	wake	Mayan	up!”	I	was	almost	hysterical.
Hearing	the	commotion,	the	guard	came	running	and	I	shouted	at	him	to
fetch	the	 key	of	the	 shed	where	 the	flying	 machine,	Pushpaka	 Vimana,	 as	 my
bumbling	professor	of	a	father-in-law	called	it,	was	kept.	He	ran	tӀept.	He	o	do
my	bidding	while	Maricha	stared	at	me.
“We	 are	 going	 now.”	 I	 said	 with	 finality.	 Maricha	 shook	 his	 head	 and

walked	away.	“Where	are	you	going?”	I	got	angrier	by	the	minute.	How	dared
he	walk	away	without	an	answer?
“To	change,”	he	shouted	back	and	banged	his	chamber	door	shut.	I	smiled
at	the	old	man.	I	stood	there	thinking	about	what	lay	ahead.	As	Maricha	said,	it
was	a	mission	fraught	with	great	danger.	For	one,	I	had	not	flown	the	Pushpaka
in	 a	 long	 time.	 I	 did	 not	 like	 flying.	 Man	 was	 not	 supposed	 to	 fly,	 otherwise
Shiva	 would	 have	 given	 him	 wings.	 So	 a	 flying	 machine	 was	 a	 challenge	 to
God.	I	also	questioned	the	emotion	which	made	me	want	to	see	my	daughter.	I
had	kept	a	tab	on	her	as	she	grew	up	but	after	my	sons	had	been	born,	I	rarely
even	read	the	reports	sent	to	me	by	my	spies.	Mithila	was	too	far	away	and	too
small	to	be	of	any	consequence	to	my	mighty	and	ever-growing	empire.	Since
she	was	so	far	away,	I	rarely	thought	of	her.	Soon	she	was	as	good	as	dead	to
me.	 Or	 worse,	 as	 if	 she	 had	 never	 been	 born.	 So	 a	 dangerous	 intrusion	 into
enemy	territory	without	my	army,	was	foolhardiness.
“Ravana,	 son,	 I	 am	 so	 happy.	 .	 .so	 happy.	 .	 .”	 My	 father-in-law	 stood
panting	before	me	like	a	happy	child.	The	old	man	had	come	running	with	the
keys	 jingling	 at	 his	 waist.	 I	 had	 begun	 to	 like	 this	 absent-minded	 professor.
Before	he	had	undertaken	the	construction	of	the	mighty	temple	at	Gokarna,	I
had	 never	 taken	 him	 seriously.	 Since	 then	 he	 had	 built	 scores	 of	 similar
structures	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 our	 sacred	 rivers.	 He	 was	 a	 master-craftsman	 and
engineer.
Sprightly	old	Mayan	ran	like	a	teenager	to	the	shed	where	the	Pushpaka
was	 kept.	 He	 fumbled	 with	 the	 keys	 and	 then	 opened	 the	 door	 wide.	 I	 had
always	admired	the	smooth	contours	of	this	strange	machine.	It	had	huge	wings
that	did	not	flap	but	whirled	round	dazzlingly	fast.	It	looked	like	a	bird,	yet	it
also	resembled	a	fish.	It	had	some	levers,	the	use	of	which	I	had	mastered	over
the	years.	I	was	not	a	good	flier,	but	nevertheless,	I	could	handle	the	machine
reasonably	well.	Mayan	rambled	on	about	the	use	of	the	various	levers	and	the
sail	once	the	machine	reached	a	certain	height,	so	it	would	float	in	the	air.	But	I
was	barely	listening.	‘Should	I	tell	Mandodari?’	It	was	a	journey	of	over	2000
miles	 and	 could	 take	 three	 days.	 Eventually,	 I	 left	 her	 a	 note	 to	 say	 I	 would
return	in	a	week.	Then	I	hesitated	for	a	moment	and	guilt	made	me	add	that	I
loved	her.
By	this	time	Maricha	had	arrived	and	packed	my	clothes,	some	food	and
wine,	as	well	as	my	weapons,	along	with	his	things.	He	threw	the	entire	lot	into
the	back	of	the	flying	ship	and	asked	hopefully,	“Ravana,	do	you	really	want	to
go?”

I	jumped	in	as	he	shook	his	head	and	followed	suit.	I	was	apprehensive	at
first,	but	then,	with	a	silent	prayer	to	Shiva,	I	pushed	the	lever	and	the	machine
rolled	out	slowly.	I	pushed	another	lever	and	the	fans	whirled	faster	and	faster
till,	with	a	jerk,	the	Pushpaka	lifted	into	the	air.	I	could	see	Marciha	clutching
the	metal	rails	in	front	of	his	seat.	I	was	afraid	as	well	but	pushed	the	thoughts
of	the	thing	stalling	in	mid-air,	out	of	my	mind.	It	was	frightening	to	think	of
us	falling	like	bird	droppings,	to	be	splattered	on	the	face	of	the	rocks	below
Lanka	faded	away	below	us,	a	green	teardrop	island	in	an	ocean	that	was
silvery-black	in	the	moonlight.	There	were	thousands	of	stars	splattered	over
an	 inky	 black	 sky,	 as	 if	 the	 Gods	 were	 peering	 through	 the	 holes	 of	 their
blankets.	Wispy	clouds	swirled	beside	us.	My	mane	flew	in	the	howling	wind.	I
imagined	 how	 impressive	 I’d	 look	 to	 an	 onӀlook	 to	 looker	 and	 smiled	 to
myself.	 Maricha	 had	 also	 relaxed	 a	 little.	 I	 howled	 with	 pleasure	 as	 we	 flew
over	 the	 mainland	 and	 Maricha	 joined	 me.	 I	 tried	 to	 remember	 the	 raunchy
songs	of	my	teenage	days.	And	we	flew	to	the	barbarian	lands	of	the	north	with
naughty	 Asura	 songs	 on	 our	 lips	 –	 an	 old	 man	 of	 nearly	 sixty	 and	 a	 middleaged	 man	 of	 forty,	 like	 two	 teenagers	 with	 no	 worries	 in	 the	 world,	 on	 their
first	picnic	without	elders.
I	had	unfurled	the	sails	and	we	cruised	at	a	steady	speed.	The	fans	would
only	be	needed	to	land.	Below,	India	lay	sprawled	with	her	riches	and	sorrows.
There	were	towering	mist-filled,	steamy	jungles,	almost	touching	the	sea	to	the
west,	 and	 wide	 open	 plains,	 broken	 by	 small	 hills	 and	 hillocks,	 to	 the	 east.
There	 were	 estuaries	 and	 backwaters	 with	 coconut	 palms	 standing	 tall	 like
sentinels,	 broken	 only	 by	 the	 temples	 that	 stood	 even	 taller.	 Silvery	 rivers
snaked	 through	 the	 land	 and	 a	 million	 moons	 reflected	 from	 the	 blades	 of
swaying	 paddy	 leaves.	 It	 was	 immensely	 beautiful.	 My	 heart	 filled	 with	 pride
when	I	saw	the	prosperity	I	had	brought	to	the	once-parched	countryside.	It	was
my	India,	my	empire,	the	ancient	land	of	the	Asuras.
I	knew	that	by	tomorrow	night	I	would	be	flying	over	unclaimed	territory,
a	no	man’s	land	of	shrubs	and	jungles	and	mazy	sand	dunes	of	central	India,
that	separated	my	kingdom	from	the	barbarian	Deva	principalities	on	the	banks
of	the	sacred	Ganga,	Yamuna	and	Saraswathi	Rivers	beyond.	I	felt	sad	that	I	had
not	 extended	 my	 kingdom	 to	 the	 abode	 of	 Lord	 Shiva.	 The	 Himalayas	 too
belonged	 to	 the	 Asuras,	 as	 did	 the	 Ganga,	 that	 flowed	 from	 the	 manes	 of	 an
Asura	 God	 –	 Shiva,	 the	 supreme	 God	 of	 gods,	 Parameswara.	 Why	 did	 I	 stop
the	campaign?	I	should	have	extended	my	kingdom	to	the	whole	of	our	ancient
land	and	thrown	 the	Devas	into	the	wilderness	beyond	the	 Saraswathi	and	the

Sindhu.	I	had	started	with	such	an	ambition,	but	somehow,	over	the	years,	I	had
lost	my	ambition	and	my	dreams	had	shrunk.	I	was	too	happy	making	half	of
India	prosperous	and	wealthy.	Perhaps	it	was	a	wise	decision.
Maricha	 had	 grown	 silent	 and	 was	 dozing.	 I	 looked	 down	 again	 and
wondered	at	the	sheer	size	of	mother	earth.	I	felt	humbled.	All	the	dreams	of
glory,	all	the	wars	I	had	fought,	all	the	kingdoms	I	had	gained	–	it	all	seemed
so	small	in	comparison.	The	earth	was	eternal,	everything	else	perished.	How
many	 men	 had	 dreamt	 ambitious	 dreams	 like	 me,	 and	 achieved	 them?	 How
many	 had	 built	 their	 fortunes?	 How	 many	 kings	 had	 this	 earth	 seen	 and	 how
many	more	were	yet	to	come?	Ultimately,	did	their	toil	matter	to	mother	earth?
She	remained	aloof	from	the	petty	travails	of	man.
Men	 cheat,	 betray,	 love,	 strive,	 struggle,	 fail,	 fall,	 get	 up,	 and	 repeat	 the
process	 to	 die	 and	 vanish	 forever	 or	 be	 reborn.	 But	 the	 earth	 remains	 aloof,
distant	 and	 unchangeable.	 I	 was	 just	 a	 speck	 floating	 in	 the	 mighty	 universe.
Tomorrow,	 or	 perhaps	 the	 next	 minute,	 I	 would	 be	 gone.	 Would	 it	 matter	 to
anyone?	A	few	perhaps	would	be	sad	and	others	happy	for	it,	but	it	would	only
be	 relevant	 for	 a	 while.	 Over	 time,	 my	 achievements,	 my	 birth	 and	 death,
would	be	irrelevant.	So	the	size	of	my	empire	was	irrelevant	and	there	was	no
need	 for	 any	 more	 bloodshed.	 Life	 was	 too	 short	 for	 fighting	 wars	 and	 too
sweet	to	throw	away	on	silly	things	like	ambition.	I	wanted	to	believe	that	I	was
not	afraid	to	die.	One	day	everyone	died.	That	was	the	way	of	nature.	You	had
to	give	way	to	the	next	set	of	living	things.	Mentally,	I	had	never	been	afraid	to
die.	But	then,	how	could	I	ever	leave	this	beautiful	life?	Wind	whistled	past	my
ears	and	I	took	a	deep	breath	of	the	cool	morning	air.	I	breathed	life.
The	east	turned	red	as	the	clouds	floated	by	like	red-dyed	cotton,	on	the
eastern	 horizon.	 The	 west	 was	 still	 dark,	 with	 a	 pale,	 white,	 setting	 moon.
Maricha	stirred	in	his	sleep.	I	looked	at	the	man	who	had	been	more	loyal	to
me	than	anyone	else.	I	looked	at	his	greying	hair	and	balding	heaӀd	baldind,	his
still	 strong	 arms,	 and	 felt	 sad.	 Life	 was	 rushing	 past	 all	 of	 us.	 One	 day	 he
would	be	gone	and	I	would	be	alone.
‘What	would	she	be	doing	now?	Who	did	she	look	like?	Perhaps	like	her
mother?’	Something	snapped	in	me	when	I	thought	of	my	long-lost	love.	Was
the	empire	worth	losing	her?	Perhaps	it	was.	Mandodari	was	an	ideal	partner.
Vedavathi	had	been	too	spirited	to	be	a	wife	or	a	queen.	I	longed	to	see	the	face
of	 my	 daughter	 more	 than	 anything	 else.	 I	 had	 not	 read	 the	 reports	 from	 the
field	 for	 some	 time	 but	 I	 vaguely	 remembered	 reading	 about	 the	 marriage
arrangements	being	made	for	her.	These	northern	people	had	a	strange	custom.

The	father	of	the	prospective	bride	would	announce	a	contest	among	eligible
suitors.	 I	 found	 it	 boorish.	 Was	 a	 bride	 a	 prize	 to	 be	 won	 in	 a	 contest?	 I	 had
even	 heard	 of	 Deva	 men	 selling	 their	 wives	 as	 slaves,	 mortgaging	 them,	 or
using	them	as	wagers.	It	was	terrible	but	what	could	one	expect	from	a	semicivilized,	 nomadic	 tribe?	 Women	 were	 treated	 by	 the	 Deva	 men	 as	 nothing
more	than	commodities.	Perhaps	I	was	prejudiced	as	I	belonged	to	an	entirely
different	culture.	But	I	had	always	believed	a	society	could	be	called	civilized
only	when	it	treated	its	woman	and	downtrodden	people,	well.	Caste	was	rigid.
The	 condition	 of	 people	 belonging	 to	 the	 lower	 rungs	 was	 beyond
imagination.	By	such	standards,	the	people	of	the	dusty,	northern	plains,	were
almost	 sub-human.	 Of	 course,	 the	 Asuras	 had	 problems	 of	 their	 own.	 The
Asura	 men	 loved	 material	 things.	 Asura	 woman	 were	 aggressive	 and	 almost
amoral,	 but	 then,	 our	 girls	 were	 brought	 up	 almost	 exactly	 like	 our	 boys.
There	were	social	differences	like	the	caste	system	among	the	Asuras	too,	but
it	 was	 not	 based	 on	 birth	 or	 skin	 colour.	 Anyone	 could	 reach	 a	 position	 of
power	through	hard	work	and	luck.	I	was	the	best	example	of	that.
I	hoped	to	reach	Mithila	by	the	time	the	contest	for	my	daughter	began.	I
felt	restless.	‘Which	boorish	Deva	was	going	to	marry	her?	How	different	would
her	 life	 be?’	 I	 had	 a	 premonition	 that	 her	 life	 would	 not	 be	 easy.	 I	 couldn’t
explain	 it	 but	 the	 feeling	 kept	 nagging	 at	 me.	 I	 vividly	 remembered
Vedavathi&apos;s	 hysterical	 laughter.	 Her	 curse	 haunted	 me.	 What	 if	 the
astrological	prediction	that	my	daughter	would	bring	death	and	destruction	to
the	Asuras	was	true?	What	if	Vedavathi&apos;s	curse	as	she	went	up	in	flames,
found	life?	This	was	utter	nonsense.	I	was	hallucinating.	Perhaps	the	guilt	I	felt
in	abandoning	my	daughter	and	not	doing	anything	to	get	her	back,	along	with
last	night’s	drinking,	must	have	brought	it	on.	What	would	happen	if	I	claimed
my	 daughter?	 What	 right	 did	 I	 have	 to	 bring	 her	 back	 to	 an	 alien	 culture?
Would	Janaka	oblige?	Or	should	I	have	attacked	Mithila	and	brought	her	back?
It	would	have	been	half	a	day’s	job.	Mithila	was	a	small	kingdom	but	I	did	not
want	 any	 bloodshed.	 I	 had	 had	 enough	 of	 wars.	 I	 was	 also	 afraid	 of	 how
Mandodari	would	react.	She	did	not	know	of	my	yearning	for	Vedavathi,	and	I
did	not	want	to	bring	it	up.	My	straying	days	were	over	and	I	had	found	peace
and	happiness	in	marriage.	Athikaya	was	an	embarrassment.	I	did	not	want	to
add	another.
I	was	getting	close	to	the	Narmada	and	thought	wearily	of	another	day’s

journey	still	before	us.	The	excitement	of	the	flight	had	worn	off	and	the	plains
below	were	dry	and	uninspiring.	I	dozed	off	many	times.	I	had	wanted	to	take	a
detour	 to	 Kishkindha	 to	 renew	 my	 friendship	 with	 Bali,	 but	 with	 my	 ego
hanging	 round	 my	 neck	 like	 a	 millstone,	 I	 took	 a	 route	 that	 avoided	 Bali’s
kingdom.	We	halted	for	a	few	hours	on	the	banks	of	the	Tungabhadra	to	relax
and	eat,	but	I	hurried	to	be	in	time	for	my	daughter ’s	swayamvara.

38	The	time	has	come
Ravana
We	landed	near	Mithila	early	in	the	morning.	I	had	selected	a	secluded	and
uninhabited	 place	 a	 few	 miles	 away	 from	 the	 city.	 We	 hid	 the	 Pushpaka	 with
plants	and	shrubs,	changed	into	Deva	costumes,	and	walked	towards	the	palace.
Many	people	were	going	in	the	same	direction.	Hundreds	of	vendors,	selling
all	 sorts	 of	 things,	 jostled	 with	 the	 pedestrians	 and	 cows	 that	 roamed	 about
freely.	I	observed	that	the	streets	were	narrow	and	winding	and	that	there	was
no	 drainage	 system	 to	 speak	 of.	 The	 houses	 looked	 rustic	 and	 the	 palace
looked	 like	 the	 large	 house	 of	 a	 middle-class	 farmer	 in	 Lanka.	 I	 was	 not
impressed	but	I	had	not	expected	much.	These	were	backwaters,	culturally	and
economically,	 and	 yet	 this	 was	 supposed	 to	 be	 one	 of	 the	 better	 cities	 in	 the
north.	 Most	 of	 the	 people	 had	 brown	 hair	 and	 a	 sickly	 fair	 complexion,	 but
many	were	dark	skinned	too.	I	found	many	dark-skinned	men	and	woman	at	the
palace.	 They	 had	 perhaps	 used	 some	 other	 road.	 These,	 I	 guessed,	 were	 the
untouchables.	The	better	dressed,	fair	ones,	avoided	these	pathetic	figures	and
the	semi-human	untouchables	patiently	waited	for	the	great	men	and	women	to
pass.	 What	 sort	 of	 culture	 was	 this?	 Would	 such	 a	 thing	 ever	 happen	 in	 my
rule?	Janaka	was	one	of	the	few	enlightened	kings	and	yet,	even	he	was	not	free
from	 this	 malice.	 I	 was	 a	 far	 better	 king.	 Only	 Ravana	 had	 ensured	 a
prosperous	and	just	society.
It	 was	 with	 a	 mixture	 of	 pride	 and	 contempt	 that	 I	 entered	 the	 assembly
where	a	curious	shaped	bow	lay	at	the	centre.	‘It’s	too	heavy	to	be	of	any	use.’	I
thought.	 Many	 dignitaries	 were	 seated	 and	 on	 a	 raised	 pedestal,	 in	 what
appeared	to	be	a	wooden	throne,	a	man	of	my	age	sat	with	immense	dignity.	On
a	balcony	above	him,	I	could	see	veiled	figures.	My	heart	leapt.	One	of	them
could	be	my	daughter.	I	frantically	tried	 to	catch	a	glimpse.	‘What	 would	 she

look	 like?’	 I	 cursed	 the	 blasted	 Deva	 custom	 of	 keeping	 woman	 under	 a	 veil.
People	 conversed	 with	 each	 other.	 I	 was	 amazed.	 ‘How	 could	 they	 talk	 while
their	King	was	present?’
King	 Janaka	 stood	 up	 and	 everyone	 waited	 for	 his	 pronouncement.	 His
voice	 boomed	 across	 the	 large	 hall.	 “Mighty	 kings	 and	 princes,	 today	 is	 an
auspicious	day.	 Today	 is	 the	swayamvara	 of	 my	 beloved	 daughter,	 Sita.	 Only
the	mightiest,	the	bravest,	and	the	most	skilled	among	you,	will	win	the	hand	of
my	beautiful	daughter	today.”	He	paused.	I	looked	around.	Many	pot-bellied	or
scrawny	men	were	also	sitting	around	in	anxious	anticipation.	“The	rules	of	the
contest	are	simple.	The	heavy	bow	here	has	to	be	lifted	and	strung.	Gentlemen,
it	is	not	an	easy	job.	The	bow	is	called	Triambaka	and	was	once	used	by	Lord
Shiva	himself.	The	one	who	is	able	to	lift	and	string	it,	will	win	the	hand	of	my
daughter.”
I	nearly	choked	with	laughter.	‘How	did	these	 people	get	hold	of	 Shiva’s
bow?’	 Shiva’s	 bow,	 my	 foot!	 Perhaps	 it	 gave	 them	 a	 thrill	 to	 imagine	 that
someone	would	be	able	to	lift	the	bow	of	Shiva,	the	primeval	Asura	King	and
God.
“Kings	 and	 Princes,	 behold	 my	 daughter.”	 Janaka’s	 voice	 stopped	 me
short	 in	 my	 musings.	 I	 waited	 in	 trembling	 anticipation.	 A	 hush	 fell	 on	 the
crowd.	Then	a	door	with	lots	of	bells	on	it	jingled	open	and	a	tall,	bejewelled
figure	walked	out	with	a	trail	of	maids	in	her	wake.	I	gripped	Maricha’s	hands
tightly.	I	could	feel	the	muscles	of	my	face	b‫	ۀ‬of	my	fecome	taut	while	my	heart
pounded	wildly.	She	stood	there	in	the	middle	of	hundreds	of	men,	trembling,
while	many	lusty	eyes	greedily	assessed	her	–	the	prize	of	a	stupid	contest.	One
of	 the	 maids	 came	 forward	 and	 slowly	 lifted	 her	 veil	 and	 the	 crowd	 gasped.
She	 stood	 there	 so	 radiant	 and	 lovely	 that	 I	 almost	 wept.	 Sita.	 She	 resembled
her	 mother,	 but	 her	 skin	 was	 dark,	 the	 colour	 of	 honey.	 She	 had	 long,	 black
tresses.	She	was	my	daughter,	an	Asura	princess.
I	noticed	that	the	princes	and	kings	assessed	her	like	they	had	come	to	a
cattle	market	and	have	found	their	prize	cow.	I	burned	with	anger.	What	sort	of
custom	 was	 this?	 An	 innocent	 young	 girl	 in	 her	 prime	 exposed	 to	 the	 lustful
eyes	of	old	men	who	could	win	her	in	a	contest?	What	about	her	feelings,	her
loves,	her	dreams	and	wishes?	Any	ruffian	who	has	enough	strength	to	lift	that
stupid	bow	could	marry	her.	She	would	know	none	of	the	joy	of	courting	her
husband,	there	would	be	no	whispered	words	of	love,	no	pangs	of	separation
and	the	sweet	wait	to	see	her	lover	on	a	moonlit	night.	Maricha	held	me	firm.
Initially	 I	 had	 resented	 my	 arranged	 marriage	 to	 Mandodari	 and	 cursed	 my

interfering	mother	many	times.	But	we	had	known	each	other	and	spoken	many
times.	This	was	uncivilized.
I	 could	 not	 take	 my	 eyes	 off	 my	 daughter,	 Sita.	 She	 demurely	 lifted	 her
head	 and	 scanned	 the	 lusty	 crowd	 that	 had	 assembled.	 She	 did	 not	 pause	 for
more	 than	 a	 few	 seconds	 on	 any	 one	 face.	 When	 she	 stared	 at	 me,	 my	 heart
skipped	 a	 beat.	 She	 stared	 at	 me	 intently	 and	 I	 was	 afraid.	 Something	 tugged
inside	me.	Was	it	guilt	or	fear?	I	don’t	know	and	quickly	looked	away.	When	I
looked	up	again,	I	saw	her	peering	intently	at	a	young	man	of	about	eighteen.
He	was	no	prince.	He	wore	quite	ordinary	clothing,	but	had	a	bow	thrown	over
his	shoulder	and	had	his	hair	tied	in	a	knot.	He	was	tall	and	well	toned	and	there
was	 something	 arresting	 about	 his	 appearance.	 He	 looked	 composed	 and	 at
peace	 with	 himself.	 For	 a	 young	 boy	 of	 his	 age,	 his	 composure	 was
remarkable.
I	 saw	my	daughter ’s	eyes	lock	with	the	boy’s.	She	blushed	 and	her	dark
face	 lit	 with	 a	 dimple.	 She	 looked	 down	 quickly,	 turned,	 and	 walked	 away.	 I
watched	the	dark-skinned	boy	intently.	I	felt	a	strange	jealousy	and	hatred	rush
through	my	veins.	He	might	have	sensed	my	feelings	for	he	turned	to	look	at
me	and	smiled.	I	recoiled.	I	do	not	know	why	or	how,	but	I	knew	this	man	was
dangerous.	I	was	sure	he	was	going	to	win	my	daughter.	I	was	afraid	for	my
daughter	and	for	myself.	I	wanted	to	rush	and	protect	her	from	harm.	I	wanted
to	whisk	her	away	and	take	her	to	Lanka,	away	from	these	barbarians	and	their
boorish	customs.	But	I	stood	rooted,	alone	in	my	fears	and	apprehensions,	and
prayed	for	a	miracle	to	save	my	daughter.
An	old	Brahmin	with	a	flowing	white	beard	stood	near	the	boy.	Another
young	man,	with	a	perpetual	scowl	on	his	face,	looked	at	me.	When	my	eyes
met	 his,	 he	 gave	 me	 such	 a	 look	 of	 pure	 hatred	 that	 I	 winced.	 ‘How	 did	 the
young	 muster	 so	 much	 confidence	 and	 arrogance	 so	 early?’	 I	 too,	 had	 been
young	 once	 but	 I	 had	 never	 had	 this	 kind	 of	 confidence	 or	 arrogance.	 I	 had
always	been	humble	and	deferential	towards	my	elders.
The	contest	began.	One	by	one,	the	contenders	came	forward,	tried	to	lift
the	heavy	bow,	and	failed.	After	watching	a	few	of	them,	I	realized	that	the	bow
had	 different	 weights	 on	 either	 end.	 The	 correct	 way	 to	 hold	 it	 had	 to	 be
thought	 about	 first	 and	 then	 attempted.	 Soon,	 all	 the	 invitees	 had	 tried	 and
failed.	There	was	a	disturbing	silence	in	the	room.	But	I	was	relieved.	No	brute
could	marry	my	daughter	now.	It	was	time	to	reveal	my	identity	to	Janaka	and
claim	my	daughter.	I	would	take	her	to	Lanka	and	give	her	a	life	befitting	an
Asura	princess.	She	would	marry	who	she	loved	or	I	would	find	a	good	match

for	 her.	 I	 would	 confess	 to	 Mandodari	 and	 ask	 for	 her	 forgiveness.	 Only	 I
could	a‫ۀ‬nly	I	cotone	for	all	the	follies	of	my	youth.	I	stepped	forward.
I	 felt	 the	 crowd	 staring	 at	 me	 as	 I	 walked	 towards	 the	 king.	 But	 then	 I
realized	 my	 mistake.	 Everyone	 thought	 I	 too	 was	 a	 contender	 and	 Janaka
looked	at	me	hopefully	and	then	frowned.	He	must	have	thought	I	was	too	old
for	his	daughter.	I	was	only	forty-six,	but	in	a	society	where	girls	were	married
at	six,	I	was	ancient.	I	stopped	when	I	was	near	the	bow.	I	was	curious.	I	touched
it,	 running	 my	 fingers	 over	 its	 curves.	 I	 gripped	 it.	 It	 had	 poor	 workmanship
and	 I	 was	 sure	 this	 bow	 could	 never	 be	 strung.	 It	 would	 break	 if	 anyone	 was
able	to	lift	it.	Shiva	definitely	could	not	have	used	this	inferior	product.	Janaka
must	have	picked	it	up	from	some	school	of	armaments	were	trainees	practised
making	bows.	This	was	an	imperfect	sample	and	these	people	were	conducting
a	contest	to	sell	off	my	daughter	with	this?
“Sir,	if	you	want	to	try,	you	should	hurry,”	a	minister	called	out.	I	stared
at	him	evenly.	‘What	would	I	do	if	I	lifted	it?	Marry	my	own	daughter?’	Then
the	 dark	 and	 handsome	 young	 man	 came	 forward	 and	 bowed	 to	 the	 king.	 I
looked	up.	Sita	had	removed	her	veil	and	sat	waiting	in	anxious	anticipation.	A
part	 of	 my	 heart	 wanted	 this	 young	 man	 to	 win.	 My	 daughter	 would	 get	 a
husband	she	liked,	if	not	loved.	Another	dark	corner	of	my	mind	kept	telling
me	that	Sita	would	never	be	happy	with	this	man.	I	was	certain	that	even	if	the
young	man	succeeded	in	lifting	the	bow,	it	would	break	if	he	tired	to	string	it.	If
that	happened,	Sita	would	be	spared,	at	least	temporarily.	I	waited	for	him.
“Your	Highness!	I	am	Rama,	Prince	of	Ayodhya,	first	born	son	of	King
Dasratha.”	The	young	man	bowed	to	King	Janaka.	‘Ayodhya?	hmm.	.	.where	had
I	heard	that	name	before.	.	.	possibly	one	of	those	small	and	irrelevant	pastoral
principalities	 that	 dotted	 the	 dusty	 northern	 plain.’	 Then	 it	 struck	 me.	 King
Anarnya.	 .	 .	 and	 my	 campaign.	 ‘Oh	 God!	 That	 dreadful	 little	 one-horse	 town,
not	even	half	the	size	of	Mithila.’	I	remembered	how	primitive	the	place	was.	I
had	finished	off	the	last	king	long	ago,	hadn’t	I?	These	plains	sprouted	kings
like	mushrooms!
I	 moved	 back.	 Rama	 walked	 around	 the	 bow	 two	 or	 three	 times,
observing	it	keenly.	I	was	impressed.	This	chap	was	intelligent	and	resourceful.
He	had	not	rushed	in	to	show	off	his	strength.	He	measured	the	bow	from	one
end	to	the	other	with	the	tip	of	his	middle	finger	and	thumb.	Then	he	found	a
spot	 three	 fingers	 above	 the	 middle	 and	 with	 one	 smooth	 motion,	 lifted	 the
bow.	 He	 almost	 staggered	 with	 the	 weight	 but	 got	 back	 his	 balance	 quickly.	 I
began	to	perspire.	‘Would	he	do	it?’	The	bow	should	break,	if	my	knowledge

of	arms	was	to	be	trusted.	It	could	not	be	strung.	I	looked	at	Sita.	She	was	tense,
with	her	palms	together	in	a	silent	prayer.
Rama	 took	 the	 string	 from	 the	 bottom	 and	 tried	 to	 tie	 it	 to	 the	 top.	 His
muscles	 were	 taut	 and	 his	 face	 showed	 the	 stress	 of	 the	 effort.	 I	 watched
fascinated.	 ‘This	 boy	 was	 a	 good	 warrior.	 Maybe	 almost	 as	 good	 as
Meghanada.’	The	bow	bent	and	Rama	wound	the	first	round	of	string.	I	could
feel	 the	 tension	 in	 the	 air.	 Everyone	 watched	 the	 young	 man	 perform	 the
impossible.	 Miraculously,	 the	 bow	 held.	 I	 could	 not	 fathom	 how.	 ‘Is	 my
knowledge	 so	 rusty?’	 I	 looked	 away	 from	 the	 taut	 figure	 of	 the	 Prince	 of
Ayodhya	to	my	daughter,	and	in	that	instant	I	heard	a	small	creak.	I	turned	back
quickly.	My	hear‫ۀ‬ckly.	Myt	raced.	I	knew	that	sound.	The	next	instant	the	bow
broke	into	two	with	a	whip-like	crack.	Rama	looked	confounded	for	a	minute.
Everyone	was	too	stunned	to	speak.	I	was	ecstatic.	No	one	could	string	the	bow.
I	could	now	take	Sita	away	to	Lanka.	I	looked	at	Maricha,	but	he	sadly	shook
his	head.	I	was	confused	and	raised	an	eyebrow	in	question.
Then	 a	 deafening	 cheer	 rose	 all	 around	 me.	 I	 watched	 in	 dismay	 and
shock	 as	 my	 daughter	 approached	 the	 Prince	 of	 Ayodhya	 and	 garlanded	 him.
From	that	moment,	Sita	and	Rama	were	husband	and	wife.	Tears	welled	up	in
my	eyes.	I	looked	at	the	young	couple	and	could	see	the	happiness	and	pride	in
Rama’s	eyes	at	the	unexpected	victory,	and	the	prize.	It	upset	me.	‘You	do	not
deserve	her,	young	man,’	I	wanted	to	shout.	Then	I	saw	pure	and	innocent	love
in	Sita’s	eyes	and	felt	helpless.	What	right	did	I	have	to	destroy	the	happiness
she	 felt?	 ‘Daughter,	 I	 have	 failed	 you.’	 I	 hoped	 she	 would	 be	 happy	 with	 the
man	 she	 love	 so	 much.	 I	 hoped	 he	 would	 treat	 her	 with	 love	 and	 respect	 and
reciprocate	her	love.	I	hoped	he	would	be	worthy	of	her.	I	had	no	rights	over
my	daughter,	but	I	prayed	for	her	happiness.	Something	told	me	that	the	man
she	had	chosen,	or	more	correctly	the	man	who	had	won	her	as	a	prize,	would
only	make	her	sad.	I	hoped	I	was	wrong.	But	I	would	keep	a	protective	watch
over	her	from	now	on.	She	was	the	daughter	of	the	most	powerful	Emperor	on
earth.	 If	 I	 ever	 found	 that	 the	 man	 was	 not	 worthy	 of	 her,	 I	 would	 whisk	 her
away	 to	 my	 palace,	 my	 bosom,	 and	 protect	 her	 from	 all	 harm.	 I	 turned	 and
pushed	 my	 way	 out	 through	 the	 thronging	 crowds.	 I	 emerged	 sweating	 and
tired,	unable	to	control	my	tears.	I	tried	to	push	Sita	from	my	mind	and	cursed
myself	for	having	come	on	this	trip.
I	retraced	my	steps	to	where	we	had	hidden	the	Pushpaka.	I	was	tired	of
this	Deva	kingdom	and	their	strange	practices.	I	wanted	to	get	back	to	Lanka,	to
my	 wife,	 my	 sons,	 and	 my	 people.	 I	 reached	 the	 hiding	 place	 and	 only	 then

realized	 that	 Maricha	 was	 not	 with	 me.	 Maricha	 came	 a	 little	 later.	 I	 was	 still
worried	 about	 my	 daughter.	 ‘At	 least	 her	 husband	 seemed	 to	 be	 a	 capable
warrior.	 Let’s	 see	 how	 things	 turned	 out.’	 I	 could	 not	 shake	 off	 the	 dark
premonitions	 I	 felt	 as	 I	 climbed	 into	 the	 Pushpaka	 and	 motioned	 Maricha	 to
follow.
“Tell	our	entire	network	to	keep	a	watch	on	them,	Maricha.	Keep	an	eye
on	the	boy.	Watch	him	closely,”	I	told	Maricha	and	he	nodded	gravely.
“We	 shouldn’t	 have	 waited	 this	 long	 to	 take	 her	 home,”	 Maricha	 said.	 I
felt	the	same.	But	there	was	no	use	thinking	about	that	now.
We	reached	Lanka	in	two	days.	I	confessed	to	Mandodari	my	affair	with
the	Deva	Brahmin	woman.	It	was	difficult	but	I	told	her	everything.	I	told	her
about	 our	 daughter	 and	 the	 fear	 I	 felt	 for	 her.	 She	 wept	 at	 my	 betrayal,	 but
forgave	me.	I	had	a	feeling	Mandodari	had	known	about	it	all	along	but	had	not
brought	 up	 the	 subject.	 My	 confession	 was	 good	 for	 both	 of	 us.	 I	 had	 the
feeling	that	from	that	day	on,	she	respected	me	more.	Mandodari	told	me	she
yearned	to	have	our	daughter	back,	but	since	she	was	already	married,	it	would
be	better	to	leave	her	with	her	husband.	I	finally	slept	peacefully.
As	promised,	I	watched	Sita	closely.	I	learned	with	dismay	that	Rama	had
thrown	away	his	inheritance	because	his	step-mother	wanted	her	own	son	to	be
king.	She	had	extracted	a	promise	from	Dasaratha	that	he	would	send	away	his
eldest	 son	 to	 the	 wilderness	 for	 fourteen	 years	 and	 make	 her	 son,	 Bharata,
king.	My	son-in-law,	the	fool	that	he	was,	volunteered	to	abdicate	his	claim	and
vanished	in‫ۀ‬d	vanishto	the	 wilderness.	Though	the	people	of	Ayodhya	 wanted
Rama	 to	 be	 their	 king,	 he	 ignored	 the	 wishes	 of	 the	 masses	 to	 satisfy	 his
henpecked	 father.	 I	 hated	 Rama	 for	 his	 false	 ego	 and	 eagerness	 to	 prove	 his
self-righteousness	to	the	world.	I	would	never	understand	his	logic.	And	how
could	his	father	have	made	such	an	unfair	promise?	A	king	could	not	act	like
that.	It	was	against	Raja	Dharma.	As	the	heir,	it	was	Rama’s	duty	to	rise	against
the	 king	 who	 had	 acted	 unjustly.	 He	 should	 have	 overthrown	 his	 father	 and
assumed	the	kingship.	Instead,	he	abdicated	in	favour	of	his	step-brother.	And
his	 other	 brother,	 Lakshmana,	 followed	 him	 into	 the	 wild.	 And	 now	 my
beautiful	daughter	had	been	dragged	along	with	them.
I	 instructed	 my	 soldiers	 to	 protect	 the	 trio	 from	 enemies	 and	 keep	 me
informed.	 I	 learnt	 that	 Rama	 roamed	 all	 over	 India	 and	 many	 times	 my	 spies
saw	 Sita	 crying	 silently,	 all	 alone.	 I	 suspected	 that	 Lakshmana	 was	 an

uncultured	 brute	 and	 was	 always	 afraid	 he	 would	 harm	 my	 daughter.	 But	 my
fears	 were	 misplaced.	 Lakshmana	 appeared	 to	 be	 devoted	 to	 his	 brother	 and
sister-in-law.	Meanwhile,	Lanka	prospered	and	I	introduced	many	reforms.	But
Sita	 continued	 to	 occupy	 my	 thoughts.	 I	 was	 worried.	 Then	 one	 day,
Soorpanakha	came	running	to	my	court.	The	time	had	come.

39	Return	of	the	Asura	Princess
Bhadra
I	 am	 almost	fifty	now	and	I	had	 grown	bald	and	lost	the	strength	of	my
limbs	and	my	mind	as	well.	Each	day	was	like	any	other	day.	It	dawned,	I	woke
and	did	my	chores,	ate,	imagined	the	beautiful	girls	I	had	seen	at	some	point	in
my	life,	brooded	over	the	way	things	were	going,	drank,	complained	about	the
affairs	 of	 the	 world,	 bored	 listeners	 with	 the	 real	 and	 imagined	 feats	 of	 my
youth,	and	collapsed	onto	my	bed	at	the	end	of	the	day,	to	wake	again	the	next
day.	 And	 the	 cycle	 continued.	 Ravana’s	 revolution	 had	 given	 us	 nothing.	 We
were	perhaps	slightly	better	off.	Maybe	even	more	civilized.	But	we	had	been
put	in	our	place	and	quickly	learnt	how	to	behave.	There	were	the	nobles,	and
then	there	were	all	the	others.	There	were	the	privileged	ones,	and	then	us.	As
long	 as	 we	 kept	 to	 our	 place,	 we	 could	 live.	 But	 many	 among	 us,	 through
enterprise,	luck,	and	a	great	deal	of	sycophancy,	had	managed	to	rise.	Most	of
my	earlier	companions	in	the	army	continued	to	be	dirt	poor	like	me.	But	a	few
had	become	really	important.
The	 most	 irritating	 thing	 was	 how	 the	 Brahmins	 had	 grown	 in	 recent
years.	After	the	failed	coup	and	the	butcher	incident,	there	was	a	temporary	halt
to	Brahmins	coming	south.	And	there	were	fewer	followers	for	their	religion.
But	not	long	afterwards,	they	began	seeping	back	in.	Ravana	had	by	this	time
developed	 his	 own	 ideas	 about	 how	 a	 great	 king	 should	 behave.	 A	 group	 of
Brahmins,	 led	 by	 their	 holy	 man	 Agastya,	 requested	 asylum	 in	 the	 Asura
kingdom.	 Prahastha	 opposed	 giving	 them	 refuge	 and	 there	 was	 much
resentment	 among	 the	 public	 as	 well.	 But	 Ravana,	 in	 his	 kingly	 wisdom,
decided	to	grant	them	asylum.
For	a	few	years,	Agastya	and	his	herd	of	Brahmins	stayed	out	of	the	cities
and	 led	 a	 quiet	 existence.	 They	 kept	 to	 themselves	 and	 gave	 us	 no	 trouble.

Agastya	 would	 go	 and	 plead	 with	 Ravana	 to	 allow	 them	 to	 set	 up	 villages
inside	our	kingdom,	almost	every	day.	Vibhishana	also	threw	his	weight	behind
their	request.	Eventually,	they	built	villages	on	the	west	and	east	coasts	of	south
India,	including	on	the	island	of	Lanka.	It	started	as	a	trickle.	The	fair-skinned,
plump,	Brahmins	slowly	formed	their	own	little	islands	in	all	the	major	towns
and	 cities	 of	 the	 empire.	 And	 before	 we	 knew	 what	 had	 happened,	 they	 had
occupied	 all	 the	 important	 positions	 in	 the	 civil	 services,	 taken	 over	 the
temples,	and	effectively	push ^ed	out	all	others	from	lucrative	and	important
positions.
Ravana	believed	that	to	be	respected	in	the	world,	he	had	to	be	a	secular
king	and	treat	every	religion	with	respect	and	tolerance.	The	ideals	for	which
many	 Asuras	 like	 me	 had	 fought,	 were	 forgotten.	 He	 went	 to	 the	 extent	 of
saying	that	the	minorities	had	equal	rights	over	the	country’s	resources,	and	as
King,	he	was	duty	bound	to	protect	them.
The	 people	 fumed.	 After	 fighting	 for	 Asura	 glory	 and	 sacrificing
everything	 in	 quest	 of	 the	 ideal	 Asura	 empire,	 was	 this	 what	 we	 deserved?	 It
seemed	 that	 only	 the	 rights	 of	 the	 minorities	 and	 their	 religious	 feelings
mattered	and	ours	did	not.	Thanks	to	the	Brahmins,	beef,	a	staple	food	of	the
Asuras,	was	banned.	Brahmins	 could	enter	our	 temples	and	abuse	 our	simple
Gods,	or	worse	could	take	over	the	temple,	if	the	money	collection	happened
to	be	good.	Eventually	they	wouldn’t	even	allow	us	to	enter	our	own	temples.
We	 were,	 after	 all,	 impure.	 The	 rights	 of	 the	 minority	 became	 an	 obsession
with	 the	 ruling	 class.	 There	 were	 many	 conversions	 from	 Asura	 to	 the	 Deva
religion,	even	when	obstinate	pigs	like	me	refused	to	be	converted.
After	that	incident	when	Athikaya	and	I	were	almost	beaten	to	death	at	the
duel,	I	no	longer	wanted	to	go	to	the	palace.	I	was	tired	of	being	a	doormat.	I
wanted	 to	 start	 my	 own	 business	 again	 but	 the	 place	 no	 longer	 existed.	 They
had	widened	the	road	and	gardens	had	come	up	where	my	old	Banyan	tree	had
stood.	 Trikota	 expanded	 on	 all	 sides	 and	 we	 were	 driven	 further	 and	 further
away.	 Men	 who	 travelled	 said	 that	 the	 city	 was	 more	 beautiful	 than	 the	 main
port	city	of	Muzaris.	But	for	people	like	me,	things	had	not	changed.	We	were
still	eyesores	and	had	to	be	hidden	from	people	who	mattered.	But	they	needed
us	 too.	 After	 all,	 who	 else	 would	 have	 tended	 their	 gardens;	 become	 their
maids	and	nannies;	drawn	water	and	hewn	wood	for	them;	swept	their	streets;
and	carried	away	their	night	soil?	So,	while	they	did	not	like	us,	they	tolerated
us.	We	learnt	how	to	become	invisible.	Most	of	us	would	perform	our	chores
and	vanish	before	the	city	woke.	And	life	went	on.	It	had	been	almost	fourteen

years	since	they	had	beaten	my	son	and	me.
When	 Trikota	 expanded	 and	 grew,	 I	 moved	 with	 my	 wife	 to	 a	 small	 hut
many	 miles	 south	 of	 the	 city,	 and	 tried	 my	 hand	 at	 farming.	 I	 cleared	 some
jungle	and	decided	to	cultivate	pepper	and	cardamom.	I	did	not	have	seeds,	so	I
took	some	on	loan	from	the	local	money	lender.	And	then	we	began	weaving
our	dreams	of	becoming	rich.	After	some	time,	those	dreams	were	diluted	to
dreams	 of	 living	 comfortably.	 Later,	 we	 only	 dreamed	 of	 making	 ends	 meet,
then	 of	 eating	 at	 least	 one	 meal	 a	 day.	 We	 dreamed	 of	 somehow	 getting	 free
from	the	tangle	of	debt.	Finally,	we	gave	up	dreaming	altogether.
But	 the	 nobles	 continued	 to	 prosper.	 They	 dazzled	 the	 world	 with	 their
wealth	which	they	showed	off	with	pomp	and	pride.	And	it	was	said	that	under
Ravana’s	reign,	the	Asura	kingdom	prospered	at	a	great	rate.	It	was	true.	The
elite	 prospered,	 so	 the	 country	 prospered.	 Did	 it	 really	 matter	 if	 the	 majority
struggled	 or	 farmers	 committed	 suicide	 to	 escape	 the	 usurers?	 We	 were	 the
invisible	people	and	did	not	count.	I	took	solace	in	the	fact	that	my	country	was
one	of	the	fastest	growing	countries	in	the	world.	Not	that	it	filled	my	stomach,
but	it	helped	me	to	brag	and	it	tickled	my	ego.	I	had	many	friends	like	myself.
We	 got	 drunk	 every	 day	 in	 the	 local,	 shabby	 haunts	 and	 raised	 toasts	 to	 the
prosperity	of	our	King	and	the	Asura	empire.
That	day	was	just	like	any	other	day.	Hot,	humid,	dull	and	boring.	It	was	a
breezeless	 evening	 and	 I	 had	 almost	 passed	 out	 from	 drinking	 countless
pitchers	of	palm	toddy	in	the	local	toddy	shack.	I	did	not	want	to	go	home.
It	 was	 comfortable	 here.	 Forget	 the	 money	 lender	 and	 forget	 the	 crops.
Also	the	King	and	the	nobles	and	all	the	Brahmins.	If	I	could	manage	could	m
to	sit	here	a	while,	some	fool	would	drop	in	and	buy	me	a	drink.	So	I	sat	there,
listening	 to	 spicy	 tales	 about	 the	 princess	 Soorpanakha	 and	 her	 sexual
adventures	and	the	insult	she	had	suffered	from	some	renegade	forest	dwellers,
who	 were	 rumoured	 to	 be	 Nagas	 or	 Vanaras	 or	 Devas,	 who	 had	 cut	 off	 her
breasts	and	nose	after	raping	her.	People	also	said	Ravana	was	going	to	wage	a
huge	war	to	avenge	the	insult	meted	out	to	his	sister.	It	was	then	that	we	heard
the	 deafening	sound	 of	 the	flying	machine.	We	 all	ran	out.	There	was	a	 huge
crowd	 looking	 skywards.	 I	 jostled	 for	 a	 vantage	 point	 as	 people	 pushed	 and
shoved	all	around.	The	traffic	on	the	streets	had	come	to	a	standstill.	Was	the
mad	professor	Maya	at	his	aerial	acrobatics	again?
Then	 a	 huge	 gasp	 went	 through	 the	 crowd.	 I	 could	 see	 the	 profile	 of	 a
grim-faced	Ravana,	concentrating	hard	to	control	the	complicated	machinery,

as	the	huge	iron	bird	swept	over	us.	But	what	made	my	hangover	vanish,	was
the	sight	of	the	huddled	figure	of	a	woman,	with	her	head	bend,	and	evidently
crying,	as	the	iron	bird	swept	over	the	howling	crowd.	In	the	red	glow	of	the
setting	sun,	the	lovely	face	of	the	lady	was	clear.	A	shudder	passed	through	me.
It	 was	 a	 face	 from	 my	 long-forgotten	 past.	 Was	 it	 Mandodari?	 She	 looked
exactly	like	the	queen	had	when	she	was	young,	but	possessed	a	much	darker
skin	tone.	She	looked	exactly	the	same	all	these	years	later.	‘What	was	the	King
up	to	this	time?’	I	did	not	know.	I	only	knew	the	fear	that	crept	over	me	from
my	toes.	Instinctively	I	knew	there	was	going	to	be	trouble	–	big	trouble.

40	Adieu	Maricha!
Ravana
Maricha	 was	 dead.	 Actually,	 he	 had	 been	 brutally	 murdered	 and	 I	 was
responsible	for	it.	I	had	failed	him.	It	had	been	a	foolish	scheme	fraught	with
danger.	Like	an	adventurous	teenager,	I	had	recklessly	jumped	in	and	lost	him
in	 the	 bargain.	 He	 had	 advised	 me	 against	 it.	 I	 took	 away	 my	 daughter	 from
Rama,	but	sacrificed	my	beloved	uncle.	Thinking	back,	the	entire	mission	was
foolish.	 I	 had	 instantly	 reacted	 to	 the	 sight	 of	 a	 breastless,	 noseless	 and
screaming	Soorpanakha,	at	my	durbar,	the	previous	evening.
The	 entire	 assembly	 had	 been	 stunned.	 For	 some	 minutes	 we	 did	 not
comprehend	what	she	was	blabbering	about.	She	had	been	hysterical	and	in	a
state	 of	 shock,	 and	 took	 almost	 half	 an	 hour	 to	 make	 some	 sense.	 When	 I
understood	what	she	said,	I	burned	with	rage.	‘How	dare	that	insignificant	man
lay	 hands	 on	 my	 sister?’	 And	 she	 looked	 so	 pathetic.	 She	 had	 never	 been	 a
beauty,	even	in	her	youth,	but	now,	in	her	late	thirties,	with	her	nose	cut	off,	she
looked	 hideous.	 She	 rambled	 about	 how	 she	 had	 found	 a	 lovely	 woman
roaming	the	jungle	with	two	men	and	had	merely	asked	whether	the	lady	would
be	 willing	 to	 be	 the	 wife	 of	 her	 brother,	 the	 Asura	 Emperor.	 At	 that,	 the
younger	man	had	pounced	on	her	and	done	what	was	visible	to	everyone	now.
She	howled	until	I	lost	my	temper	and	hit	her	across	her	face.	Then	she	stopped
dead.	 I	 tried	 making	 amends	 by	 putting	 my	 hands	 on	 her	 shoulders,	 but	 she
stormed	out,	cursing	me	and	lamenting	that	she	had	such	a	spineless	brother.
I	smarted	from	the	insult	to	my	sister.	But	more	shameful	was	the	fact	that
I	had	a	sister	like	her.	I	had	kept	a	watch	on	her	when	she	had	moved	in	with
our	 distant	 cousins,	 Khara	 and	 Dushana,	 who	 were	 two	 of	 my	 vassal	 kings
whose	 petty	 kingdoms	 bordered	 the	 northern	 Deva	 lands.	 Initially	 I	 had	 been
amused	at	the	number	of	men	she	bedded	but	was	later	disgusted.	It	was	not	a

crime	according	to	Asura	social	law,	but	the	times	had	changed.	Some	Dev怅alike	tenets	of	morality	had	brushed	onto	me	as	well.	It	had	probably	been	while
chasing	 a	 man,	 that	 she	 had	 come	 across	 the	 two	 men	 and	 the	 woman,	 who	 I
was	 quite	 sure,	 were	 my	 daughter,	 son-in-law	 and	 his	 brother.	 Soorpanakha
was,	 of	 course,	 unaware	 of	 the	 relationship,	 else	 she	 would	 have	 told	 me	 a
different	lie.
Another	 thought	 worried	 me.	 ‘How	 safe	 was	 my	 daughter	 with	 these
dangerous	 men?’	I	was	in	no	 mood	 to	continue	 the	durbar	so	I	 dismissed	the
assembly	and	retired	to	my	private	chambers.	I	called	for	Mandodari	and	told
her	 my	 decision.	 It	 was	 not	 easy.	 She	 was	 not	 happy	 when	 she	 heard	 what	 I
planned	to	do.	But	I	told	her	that	I	could	not	leave	our	daughter	with	men	who
cut	 off	 a	 woman’s	 ears	 and	 nose.	 I	 was	 concerned	 about	 her	 safety.	 Then
Mandodari	 advised	 to	 declare	 war	 and	 capture	 Sita.	 I	 laughed	 at	 the	 idea	 of
waging	a	war	against	two	insignificant	men.	It	was	too	much	trouble	and	too
expensive.	I	knew	what	I	was	going	to	do	and	there	was	no	turning	back.
I	told	Maricha	the	plan.	He	didn’t	think	well	of	it	and	told	me	that	I	was
being	 emotional	and	 childish.	I	was	livid.	 I	could	 see	the	hurt	and	pain	in	the
old	 man’s	 eyes,	 but	 he	 continued	 to	 argue	 with	 me.	 I	 was	 so	 furious	 that	 I
decided	to	carry	out	the	mission	alone.	Finally,	he	agreed	to	go	along	with	my
plan	and	we	took	to	the	skies	in	search	of	my	daughter.
While	 we	 were	 flying	 north,	 Maricha	 tried	 to	 dissuade	 me	 again.	 I
ignored	him.	“You	could	 kill	Rama	and	 his	brother	and	bring	Sita	 back	after
telling	her	the	truth	about	her	birth.”	he	said.	But	I	did	not	want	to	kill	Rama.
My	daughter	was	devoted	to	him	and	I	did	not	want	to	cause	her	any	sorrow.	I
only	 planned	 to	 keep	 Sita	 in	 Lanka	 till	 Rama’s	 voluntary	 exile	 was	 over.	 She
could	 then	 join	 him	 when	 he	 assumed	 the	 Kingship	 of	 his	 petty	 kingdom.
Secretly,	 I	 hoped	 that	 once	 I	 had	 brought	 her	 to	 Lanka	 and	 she	 had	 seen	 her
father ’s	 dazzling	 home,	 she	 would	 persuade	 her	 husband	 to	 stay	 with	 us.	 It
wasn’t	that	I	had	suddenly	developed	a	liking	for	the	man,	but	I	was	willing	to
accept	him.	I	was	even	ready	to	give	Rama	a	portion	of	my	northern	empire
But	things	started	going	awry	right	from	the	start.	When	we	reached	the
place	 where	 Rama	 had	 camped	 with	 his	 brother	 and	 Sita,	 it	 was	 early	 in	 the
morning.	 The	 forest	 looked	 idyllic.	 Had	 it	 been	 any	 other	 occasion,	 I	 would
have	 forgotten	 all	 my	 worries,	 sat	 down	 with	 my	 brush	 and	 palm	 leaf	 and
copied	the	lovely	secrets	the	jungle	held	so	close.	A	soft	curtain	of	mist	hung
over	the	trees	and	every	blade	of	grass	glistened	in	the	soft,	radiant	sunlight.	A
small,	 thatched	 hut	 sat	 perched	 on	 a	 gentle	 incline	 which	 led	 to	 a	 gurgling

stream.	 Thousands	 of	 butterflies	 of	 all	 hues	 fluttered	 about.	 Golden	 sunlight
drizzled	 through	 the	 little	 holes	 that	 appeared	 and	 disappeared	 as	 the	 tree
canopies	 gently	 swayed	 in	 the	 cool	 breeze.	 Birds	 and	 crickets,	 buzzing
honeybees	and	dragonflies,	all	added	to	the	pleasant	cacophony	of	the	jungle.
Antelopes	 grazed	 lazily,	 while	 hares	 sniffed	 suspiciously	 at	 the	 glistening
edges	 of	 grass	 and	 darted	 here	 and	 there	 aimlessly.	 And	 on	 a	 rock,	 like	 a
Goddess	 of	 the	 forest,	 Sita,	 my	 daughter,	 sat	 lost	 in	 some	 dream,	 her	 hands
crossed	lazily	at	her	navel,	the	smooth	dark	skin	of	her	legs	glistening	with	the
droplets	of	water	that	the	stream	had	playfully	thrown	up.
A	tap	on	my	shoulder	by	Maricha	broke	the	enchantment.	Then	I	saw	the
scene	 for	 what	 it	 really	 was.	 This	 was	 enemy	 territory.	 The	 enemy	 would	 be
near.	 If	 I	 encountered	 Rama,	 I	 would	 have	 to	 kill	 him.	 Contrary	 to	 what	 my
spies	reported,	Sita	seemed	happy	enough.	‘Those	cowards!	They	told	me	what
I	 wanted	 to	 hear.’	 They	 must	 have	 guessed	 that	 I	 was	 interested	 in	 the	 girl.	 I
could	 hear	 snatches	 of	 conversation	 nonversatiw	 and	 looked	 in	 the	 direction
Maricha	was	gazing	in.	Two	men	appeared	from	the	woods.	They	looked	like
hunters	and	with	a	start	I	realized	they	were	Rama	and	his	brother,	Lakshmana.
The	 brothers	 had	 grown	 darker	 and	 older	 since	 I	 had	 last	 seen	 them	 almost
fourteen	years	ago.	To	my	eyes	they	looked	dark	and	ugly,	though	Rama’s	face
still	 had	 some	 inner	 radiance.	 ‘How	 could	 Deva	 princes	 be	 so	 dark-skinned?
Even	I	was	fairer.’
“I	will	distract	Rama,	away	from	the	princess.	I	think	you	can	handle	the
younger	one,”	Maricha	whispered	in	my	ear	and	vanished	into	the	woods	in	a
flash.	I	wanted	to	tell	him	that	I	could	handle	them	both,	but	he	had	gone.	That
was	 the	 last	 time	 I	 saw	 him.	 As	 I	 said,	 it	 was	 a	 foolish	 and	 hasty	 plan,	 quite
uncharacteristic	 of	 a	 thorough	 man	 like	 Maricha.	 And	 it	 wasn’t	 as	 if	 I	 lacked
experience	 either.	 But	 that	 day,	 call	 it	 destiny,	 call	 it	 fate,	 but	 mistakes	 kept
piling	up.	I	had	been	waiting	for	almost	two	hours	and	was	getting	impatient.
‘Should	 I	 rush	 in	 and	 knock	 them	 down	 and	 take	 my	 daughter	 away?’	 I	 had
almost	decided	to	do	this	when	I	saw	a	sudden	flash	of	brilliance	on	the	other
bank	of	the	 stream.	I	watched	fascinated.	It	was	a	golden	deer.	Only	it’s	 front
and	 curved	 horns	 were	 visible,	 but	 it	 looked	 like	 a	 creature	 from	 paradise.	 It
gave	a	soft,	melodious	bark	and	vanished	into	the	bush.
The	 two	 men	 and	 Sita	 quickly	 turned	 and	 looked	 at	 the	 source	 of	 the
noise.	There	was	perfect	silence	in	the	jungle	apart	from	the	rustle	of	the	leaves
in	the	breeze	and	the	chirping	of	birds.	Then	the	golden	deer	sprung	up	again
and	vanished	into	the	bushes.	Sita	let	out	a	cry	of	joy.	I	saw	that	Lakshmana	had

drawn	his	bow,	the	arrow	pointing	towards	the	bush.	For	a	few	moments	Rama
and	Sita	watched	fascinated.	After	what	seemed	to	be	a	very	long	time,	the	deer
peeped	 out	 again.	 An	 arrow	 sprang	 from	 Lakshmana’s	 bow	 and	 pierced	 the
tree	 under	 which	 the	 deer	 had	 been	 a	 few	 seconds	 ago.	 The	 embedded	 arrow
vibrated.	I	looked	at	him	with	new	respect.	‘He	may	be	uncultured,	but	he	is	a
good	 archer	 and	 has	 been	 well	 trained,’	 I	 thought.	 I	 almost	 laughed	 aloud.	 I
knew	 it	 was	 Maricha	 who	 was	 the	 deer	 and	 that	 he	 was	 too	 good	 to	 be	 shot.
Maricha	must	have	killed	a	deer	and	skinned	it	and	was	hiding	behind	it.	It	was
a	brilliant	and	simple	camouflage.	I	could	see	Sita	chiding	Lakshmana	and	then
beseeching	 Rama	 to	 catch	 the	 deer	 for	 her.	 I	 saw	 him	 hesitate	 for	 some	 time
and	 then	 start	 towards	 the	 deer ’s	 hiding	 place.	 As	 he	 was	 about	 to	 reach	 the
opposite	bank,	the	deer	darted	away	at	great	speed	and	Rama	scrambled	to	the
other	 shore.	 He	 shouted	 to	 Lakshmana	 to	 take	 care	 of	 Sita	 while	 he	 went	 in
pursuit	of	the	deer.
I	 thought	 of	 taking	 Lakshmana	 with	 a	 well	 aimed	 arrow.	 I	 was	 sorely
tempted,	 but	 that	 was	 not	 how	 real	 men	 fought.	 Hiding	 behind	 a	 tree	 and
shooting	 an	 unsuspecting	 enemy,	 was	 a	 eunuch’s	 way	 of	 fighting.	 I	 was	 an
Asura	 and	 an	 Emperor.	 Such	 acts	 were	 not	 part	 of	 my	 character	 and	 went
against	 my	 sense	 of	 fair	 play	 and	 justice.	 But	 had	 I	 known	 then	 what	 levels
Rama	 and	 his	 brother	 were	 capable	 of	 stooping	 to,	 I	 would	 have	 surely
finished	 them	 off	 there	 and	 then.	 I	 was	 a	 fool	 and	 should	 have	 taken	 the
opportunity	 while	 it	 presented	 itself.	 So	 I	 lie	 here	 now,	 betrayed	 and	 cheated,
bleeding	 and	 being	 eaten	 by	 rodents,	 slain	 by	 lesser	 men	 who	 used	 dubious
means	to	kill	and	win.	Perhaps	I	deserved	this	fate,	for	fate	had	handed	me	the
chance	to	finish	off	these	two	men	and	I	had	frittered	it	away	to	feed	my	ego
with	talk	of	fair	play	and	justice.	I	had	the	wrong	mentors	in	my	life	and	that
was	 my	 failing.	 I	 had	 men	 like	 Bali,	 the	 epitome	 of	 justice	 and	 integrity,	 and
Mahabali,	who	threw	away	an	empire	for	the	sake	of	truth,	as	my	gurus.	So	I
too	met	the	same	fate	as	them.	Had	I	finished	ofI	finishf	those	two	then,	I	could
have	saved	the	tears	of	many	men	and	women	who	had	put	their	trust	in	me	and
believed	that	I	would	protect	them	from	evil.
When	 my	 hands	 trembled	 that	 day,	 I	 knew	 I	 had	 failed	 in	 life.	 But	 lying
here,	bathed	in	my	blood	and	that	of	my	kinsmen;	having	lit	the	funeral	pyre	of
my	beloved	children	and	lost	whatever	I	had	striven	for	over	a	lifetime;	I	knew
that	 if	 the	 same	 situation	 were	 to	 arise,	 with	 Rama	 and	 Lakshmana	 as	 easy
targets	and	I	stood	hidden	behind	a	tree	with	poisoned	arrow	drawn	taut,	I	still
would	not	shoot	them,	or	any	one	else.	That	was	the	coward’s	way.	Perhaps	that

was	why	I	was	fated	to	die	now,	but	I	would	so	with	my	head	held	high.	I	felt
nothing	 but	 sorrow	 for	 the	 man	 who	 had	 stooped	 so	 low	 to	 attain	 godhood.
‘Rama,	 was	 it	 worth	 it?’	 The	 blood	 you	 have	 shed	 will	 haunt	 you	 and	 this
country	for	years,	long	after	after	all	of	us	have	gone.	You	keep	the	godhood
you	 gained	 through	 unfair	 means	 and	 I’ll	 keep	 my	 manhood	 and	 die	 a
warrior ’s	death.
As	 I	 sat	 there	 debating	 with	 myself	 whether	 to	 finish	 off	 Lakshmana	 or
not,	I	heard	a	blood	chilling	cry.	Lakshmana	and	Sita	heard	it	too	and	we	were
all	 shocked.	 I	 recognized	 that	 voice.	 But	 I	 did	 not	 know	 then	 that	 it	 was	 the
death	 cry	 of	 my	 beloved	 uncle.	 I	 froze,	 not	 knowing	 what	 to	 do.	 I	 tried	 to
reason	 that	 it	 must	 have	 been	 part	 of	 the	 plan.	 I	 heard	 Sita	 cry	 out	 and	 then
Lakshmana’s	 raised	 voice.	 I	 saw	 him	 set	 off	 in	 the	 direction	 his	 brother	 had
taken.	Still	I	hesitated.	‘Should	I	follow	him	and	rescue	Maricha	if	he	is	in	real
danger?’	 But	 Maricha	 was	 a	 veteran.	 He	 could	 take	 care	 of	 himself.	 I	 moved
fast	 then.	 I	 hid	 my	 weapons	 as	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to	 frighten	 her.	 I	 removed	 my
jewels	 and	 bundled	 them	 in	 a	 knot	 at	 my	 waist.	 With	 the	 parallel	 ash	 marks
already	 on	 my	 forehead,	 like	 any	 devotee	 of	 Shiva,	 but	 without	 my	 royal
ornaments,	I	knew	I	looked	like	a	hermit	seeking	alms.
I	was	close	to	her	when	she	turned	and	looked	at	me.	With	those	lovely,
dark	eyes	 focused	on	me,	a	lump	formed	in	my	throat.	I	 wanted	to	touch	her
and	 take	 her	 in	 my	 arms.	 &apos;Sita,	 my	 daughter!	 Sita,	 my	 little
daughter.&apos;	I	turned	away	and	stood	with	my	eyes	closed.	I	wanted	to	kill
myself.	‘Why	had	I	forsaken	her?	Why	had	I	forgotten	her?	I	had	lost	her	entire
childhood.	 Why	 had	 I	 not	 attacked	 Mithila	 and	 taken	 her	 back?’	 Perhaps	 if	 I
had	told	Janaka	the	truth,	the	bloodshed	could	have	been	avoided.	Janaka	was
one	of	the	noblest	of	the	Deva	kings,	learned	and	wise,	he	may	have	returned
my	daughter	to	me.	But	I	did	not	trust	her	husband.	I	could	not	forgive	what	the
two	brothers	had	done	to	my	sister.	Sita	was	not	safe	with	them	and	an	Asura
princess	and	the	daughter	of	Ravana,	could	not	waste	her	life	roaming	about	in
the	 forests,	 living	 the	 life	 of	 a	 beggar.	 All	 I	 had	 achieved	 and	 earned,	 the
golden	Lanka,	the	entire	Asura	empire,	was	hers.	But	what	if	she	spurned	my
riches,	my	kingdom,	my	love?	I	was	afraid	of	the	deep	devotion	and	love	she
cherished	 for	 her	 husband.	 I	 was	 afraid	 I	 would	 unleash	 the	 supernatural
powers	 of	 that	 astrological	 prediction	 of	 long	 ago.	 I	 was	 afraid	 of	 the	 dying
words	of	Vedavathi.
Then,	as	suddenly	as	they	had	come,	the	unnatural	feelings	vanished.	With
a	prayer	in	my	mind,	I	turned	back,	only	to	find	that	she	had	vanished.	She	had

gone	into	the	hut	to	bring	me	alms.	She	came	towards	me	and	looked	for	my
bowl.	 But	 I	 pulled	 her	 towards	 me,	 circled	 her	 narrow	 waist	 with	 my	 hands,
lifted	her	over	my	shoulder,	and	ran	to	where	I	had	hidden	Pushpaka.	Sita	was
too	shocked	to	react	in	the	initial	moments,	but	after	a	few	seconds	she	started
to	cry	out	and	fight	me.	She	scratched	my	face	and	back	with	her	nails.	I	could
feel	 blood	 tricel	 bloodkling	 down.	 I	 felt	 a	 strange	 elation	 in	 thinking	 that	 I
deserved	 it	 all	 for	 having	 abandoned	 her,	 for	 believing	 in	 some	 unscientific
prediction	and	being	afraid	of	my	own	daughter,	and	for	the	things	I	had	not
given	her	as	a	father.
Finally	I	dumped	her	into	the	flying	machine	and	bolted	the	door.	Then	I
waited	for	Maricha.	I	waited	till	the	sun	had	almost	travelled	three	fourth	of	the
distance	in	the	sky	towards	the	west.	Except	for	the	sobs	escaping	my	daughter
and	the	wild	cries	of	birds	and	animals	in	the	distance,	the	forest	gave	out	no
other	 sound.	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to	 leave	 her	 to	 go	 in	 search	 of	 Maricha.	 Finally,
with	a	heavy	heart,	and	dreading	facing	my	aunt,	I	got	back	into	Pushpaka	and
began	the	journey	back	to	Lanka
The	journey	back	was	hell.	A	big	bird,	a	huge	vulture,	became	entangled
in	 the	 huge	 fans	 that	 propelled	 Pushpaka.	 It	 was	 a	 terrifying	 moment.	 The
machine	 started	 losing	 altitude	 rapidly	 as	 the	 fan	 stalled	 and	 we	 hurtled
downwards	like	a	stone.	The	earth	rushed	up	to	hold	us	in	her	deathly	embrace.
The	 bird	 struggled	 for	 its	 life	 and	 got	 even	 more	 entangled.	 In	 stupefied
fascination,	 I	 watched	 death	 rush	 up	 at	 us.	 Sita’s	 scream	 woke	 me	 from	 my
stupor	 and	 I	 drew	 my	 sword	 and	 tried	 to	 hack	 off	 the	 bird.	 The	 Pushpaka
wobbled.	 Then	 suddenly,	 the	 machine	 tipped	 and	 somersaulted	 and	 began	 to
fall,	 upside	 down.	 Sita	 slid	 down	 and	 almost	 dropped	 to	 her	 death,	 but	 I
grabbed	her	waist	with	one	hand.	My	sword	had	fallen	free.	Another	turn	and	it
would	have	cut	either	of	us	on	its	way	down.	Sita	hung	out	of	the	Pushpaka	as
the	 wind	 screamed	 past.	 I	 pulled	 her	 in	 with	 one	 mighty	 tug	 and	 the	 machine
wobbled	 some	 more.	 All	 this	 happened	 within	 seconds.	 Then	 I	 fastened	 my
hands	around	the	my	daughter ’s	narrow	waist	and	pulled	up	my	Chandrahasa
with	 one	 leg.	 With	 the	 sword	 in	 one	 hand,	 I	 hacked	 the	 bird	 with	 desperate
abandon	 and	 saw	 pieces	 of	 it	 falling	 down.	 The	 earth	 approached	 fast	 and	 I
could	 clearly	 see	 the	 leaves	 of	 the	 trees.	 I	 hacked	 at	 the	 bird	 with	 all	 my
strength,	while	the	machine	swung	wildly.	If	the	sails	came	lose,	we	would	have
to	leave	this	life.
Finally,	the	bird,	or	what	was	left	of	it,	fell	off.	We	were	sprayed	with	its
blood.	 I	 stretched	 and	 desperately	 pulled	 the	 levers	 to	 level	 the	 machine.	 The

fans	 were	 not	 rotating.	 I	 pushed	 and	 pulled,	 but	 it	 had	 stalled.	 The	 tall	 trees
were	so	close	I	could	see	the	birds	fluttering	away	in	fright	of	the	approaching
giant,	 iron	 bird.	 ‘This	 was	 it,’	 I	 thought,	 ‘an	 ignoble	 death	 in	 the	 middle	 of
nowhere,	that	too,	when	I	have	got	my	daughter	back!’	my	life	flashed	before
my	 eyes.	 I	 watched	 helplessly.	 A	 sudden	 sob	 from	 Sita	 startled	 me.	 ‘No,	 I
cannot	let	her	die.	She	is	young,	at	the	prime	of	her	life.	Did	I	rescue	her	from
her	husband	only	to	get	her	killed?’	 With	 all	 my	 might,	 I	 jerked	 the	 lever	 up
and	down	and	finally	the	fan	sputtered.	I	pulled	and	pushed	once	more,	and	with
a	shudder,	the	fan	started	rotating.	I	closed	my	eyes	in	relief	only	to	open	them
again	 in	 sudden	 terror.	 ‘No,	 it	 was	 too	 late!	 The	 blades	 were	 chopping	 the
treetops.	Would	we	make	it?	Oh	Shiva!’	Slowly,	so	slowly,	the	machine	gained
altitude.	We	were	a	few	feet	above	the	tallest	tree.	I	kept	pushing	it	up.	Ten	feet.	.
.	twenty.	.	.	and	just	when	I	thought	we	had	made	it,	I	saw	a	huge	rock	looming
ahead.	 We	 were	 heading	 straight	 into	 it.	 ‘Would	 we	 clear	 it?’	 I	 sweated
profusely	and	my	fingers	ached.	The	boulder	was	only	twenty	feet	away	now,
but	 I	 still	 had	 to	 gain	 thirty	 feet	 to	 clear	 the	 top.	 The	 fan	 almost	 touched	 the
rock.	And	just	as	I	thought	we	would	crash	into	it,	Pushpaka	cleared	the	rock
with	inches	to	spare.
I	kept	gaining	altitude	and	when	I	finally	reached	cruising	height,	I	folded
up	the	fan	and	set	up	the	sails.	I	fell	back	exhausted	and	relieved.	My	daughter
sat	like	a	stone	and	I	felt	sorry	for	her.	Then	I	remembered	Maricha.	I	had	lost
him.	It	hit	me	like	a	bolt.	In	our	own	silent	worlds	of	grief	and	loss,	father	and
daughter,	so	near	and	yet	so	far,	flew	to	Lanka.
I	 could	 see	 the	 wide-eyed	 surprise	 in	 Sita’s	 face	 when	 the	 first	 sight	 of
Lanka	 caught	 her	 attention.	 For	 a	 moment	 she	 forgot	 her	 grief.	 My	 heart
swelled	 with	 pride.	 I	 wanted	 to	 show	 her	 what	 glories	 I	 had	 in	 store	 for	 her.
‘Sita,	my	daughter,	behold	your	Lanka!’	There	was	the	golden	palace	where	she
would	 dwell.	 I	 wanted	 her	 to	 look	 at	 the	 gardens	 and	 smell	 the	 fresh	 sea;	 the
glittering	markets	and	green	paddy	fields;	the	swaying	coconut	palms	and	spice
gardens;	my	wide	royal	boulevards	and	towering	castles	and	palaces.	Let	her
see	it	all	and	compare	it	with	the	measly	home	her	husband	called	a	palace.	But
I	 was	 silent.	 I	 just	 watched	 her	 eyes	 filled	 with	 wonder,	 as	 the	 setting	 sun
reflected	off	the	golden	dome	of	my	palace	and	I	directed	the	iron	bird	into	an
uneventful	 landing.	 Before	 the	 fan	 could	 completely	 stop,	 I	 jumped	 out,
forgetting	 all	 about	 Sita.	 Mandodari	 had	 come	 running,	 followed	 by	 Trijata
and	Meghanada.	They	were	curious	to	see	our	guest.
My	 aunt	 searched	 for	 her	 husband	 but	 I	 averted	 my	 eyes.	 The	 dreaded

moment	 had	 come	 and	 I	 did	 not	 know	 what	 to	 say.	 I	 felt	 numb.	 Maricha	 was
dead.	That	was	the	naked	truth	about	my	ill-fated	adventure.	Somewhere	deep
inside	the	forest,	the	old	man	lay	dead.	I	had	left	him	to	the	mercy	of	those	two
barbarians.	At	the	time,	I	had	not	thought	of	him,	or	the	selfless	love	and	the
sacrifices	he	had	made	to	make	me	into	what	I	had	become.	I	had	heard	his	cry
and	yet	I	did	not	move.	I	heard	Rama’s	arrow	pierce	the	tired	old	skin	and	knew
that	even	in	the	final	moments	of	his	life,	he	had	been	thinking	of	me.	Yet	I	did
not	move.	His	cry	for	Lakshmana	had	been	so	like	the	voice	of	Rama,	that	Sita
had	 forced	 him	 to	 go	 in	 search	 of	 his	 brother.	 And	 I	 had	 grabbed	 her	 and
hurried	back,	without	a	thought	for	Maricha.	The	eventful	journey	back	and	my
happiness	in	bringing	home	my	daughter	to	Lanka,	had	kept	the	dark	thoughts
of	 Maricha’s	 death	 at	 bay.	 But	 as	 I	 watched	 my	 aunt’s	 face,	 the	 emotions	 of
failure,	 guilt	 and	 my	 own	 worthlessness,	 overcame	 me.	 I	 hugged	 her	 and
pressed	 my	 lips	 hard	 together	 to	 control	 my	 tears.	 She	 looked	 into	 my	 eyes,
read	what	was	plain	to	see,	and	collapsed	in	my	arms.
Sita	 refused	 to	 enter	 my	 palace.	 She	 made	 her	 home	 in	 a	 shady	 nook
under	the	Ashoka	tree	where	Meghanada	used	to	play	as	a	child.	That	was	after
I	had	failed	in	my	persuasive	attempts	to	get	her	to	move	into	my	palace	and
had	 wearily	 asked	 Trijata	 to	 keep	 a	 watch	 on	 her.	 That	 was	 after	 I	 had	 shut
myself	 in	 my	 room	 and	 cried	 for	 the	 loss	 of	 my	 dearest	 friend	 and	 counsel,
Maricha;	 after	 I	 had	 explained	 to	 his	 bereaved	 widow	 and	 my	 sceptical	 wife,
why	I	had	left	Maricha	to	the	mercy	of	barbarians;	and	after	I	left	them,	unable
to	suppress	the	guilt	I	myself	felt	for	failing	my	uncle.
The	night	wore	on	and	I	tossed	on	my	bed.	It	was	a	moonless	and	sultry
night	 and	 I	 could	 sense	 that	 Mandodari	 was	 not	 asleep	 either.	 I	 moved	 closer
and	touched	her	but	she	did	not	move.	I	waited	for	her	response.	I	wanted	her	to
hug	me	and	say	what	I	had	done	was	the	right	thing	to	do.	But	she	did	not	move.
Slowly,	I	withdrew	my	hand	and	turned	away	from	heraway	fro.
I	woke	with	a	start.	I	thought	I	had	heard	the	sound	of	sobbing.	It	was	not
coming	 from	 Mandodari.	 ‘Had	 I	 imagine	 it?’	 I	 moved	 to	 the	 window	 and
peered	 out.	 It	 was	 pitch	 dark	 outside.	 A	 few	 dying	 torches	 in	 the	 garden
accentuated	the	darkness	of	the	night.	Then,	without	any	warning,	it	started	to
rain.	The	torches	died	with	protesting	hisses	and	somewhere,	a	window	swung
back	 and	 forth,	 creating	 dull	 and	 rhythmic	 thuds	 which	 echoed	 through	 the
empty	corridors.

A	deep	fear	grew	within	me.	I	imagined	my	daughter,	all	alone,	drenched
and	miserable,	out	there	in	that	darkness.	But	I	did	not	move.	I	was	afraid.	I	was
afraid	of	myself.	As	the	sky	screamed	and	poured	and	the	earth	shivered	in	the
drenching	tears	of	heaven,	I	sat	on	my	bed,	alone,	terrified	of	the	prophecy	and
the	curse	of	Vedavathi.

41	The	police	station
Bhadra
Today	 I	 saw	 a	 strange	 sight	 and	 wondered	 whether	 I	 should	 report	 it	 to
some	 bigwig	 in	 the	 government.	 It	 was	 getting	 late.	 I	 had	 loitered	 around	 the
whole	day	and	the	few	coins	I	had	earned	cleaning	the	fat	merchant’s	chariot,	I
had	spent	on	toddy.	I	was	hungry	but	knew	there	was	nothing	to	eat	at	home.	In
fact,	it	had	been	almost	six	months	since	I	had	eaten	good	food.
I	 remembered	 Maricha’s	 grand	 funeral.	 Initially,	 none	 of	 us	 knew	 how
Prince	Maricha	had	died.	He	had	been	old,	but	was	not	ailing,	and	the	last	time	I
had	 seen	 him	 riding	 his	 black	 horse,	 he	 seemed	 sprightly.	 His	 death	 was	 a
shock	to	us.	The	official	communication	said	that	Maricha	had	died	of	old	age,
and	 that	 his	 demise	 had	 taken	 place	 near	 the	 northern	 borders	 of	 the	 Asura
kingdom,	 on	 the	 mainland.	 It	 was	 said	 that	 Maricha	 had	 been	 cremated	 there.
Why	 and	 how	 he	 had	 reached	 so	 far	 before	 his	 death,	 was	 another	 mystery.
People	had	seen	him	just	the	previous	day	and	it	was	impossible	for	any	man	to
travel	 such	 a	 vast	 distance	 so	 quickly.	 Tongues	 wagged	 about	 the	 flight	 of
Mayan’s	 magical	 bird.	 Some	 people	 claimed	 they	 had	 seen	 the	 Emperor	 fly
north	with	Maricha	in	this	iron	bird.	But	it	really	did	not	matter.	There	had	been
no	time	to	stand	and	gossip	as	my	wife	and	I	hurried	towards	the	palace	where
we	had	heard	that	the	poor	would	be	fed	well	that	day	and	new	clothes	would	be
supplied	as	well.
All	the	streets	leading	to	the	palace	were	packed	with	people.	As	I	neared
the	 palace,	 I	 saw	 there	 was	 already	 a	 huge	 crowd.	 People	 jostled	 for	 space;
there	was	a	deafening	din;	and	the	choicest	abuses	were	flying	about	fast	and
furious.	 The	 crowd	 shoved,	 pushed	 and	 stamped.	 With	 bodies	 slippery	 with
sweat,	 feet	 caked	 in	 mud,	 lungs	 choked	 with	 dust,	 the	 crowd	 inched	 forward,
only	to	be	pushed	from	behind	by	more	people	arriving.	The	sun	showed	no

mercy	and	the	stench	of	sweat,	urine	and	body	odour	of	thousands	of	hungry
people,	was	overwhelming.	I	had	gripped	my	wife’s	left	wrist,	but	I	could	feel
hands	groping	her.	She	wriggled	and	twisted,	but	like	any	other	woman	in	that
crowd,	 she	 did	 not	 have	 any	 choice	 but	 to	 bear	 it.	 There	 were	 freebies	 to	 be
had,	 so	 the	 pushing	 and	 shoving,	 breast-grabbing	 and	 ass-pinching,	 didn’t
matter	too	much.	We	pushed	ahead.
As	 we	 got	 closer,	 the	 pushing	 and	 shoving	 got	 even	 more	 intense.	 I	 too
kicked	 and	 punched	 my	 way	 through	 and	 grabbed	 a	 packet,	 handed	 over	 the
heads	of	other	fighting	men	and	woman.	I	passed	it	to	my	wife	and	then	pushed
back	again	to	get	my	share.	A	soldier	shoved	me	and	I	lost	my	balance	and	got
trampled	by	the	crowd.	Cursing,	I	managed	to	wriggle	out.	I	was	disappointed
that	we	had	got	only	one	packet	between	us.	We	moved	against	the	tide	of	poor
men	 and	 woman	 shoving	 to	 get	 hold	 of	 the	 King’s	 bounty,	 given	 in	 memory
of	his	dead	uncle.	And	I	wished	then	that	the	King	would	lose	an	uncle	every
day.
Then	there	was	lunch.	Holes	were	dug	on	either	side	of	the	royal	highway
and	plantain	leaves	were	placed	inside	these	holes.	Gruel	was	then	poured	into
these	temporary	containers	and	thousands	of	people	like	me	ate	this	treat	with
relish.	 As	 we	 ate,	 chariots	 carrying	 the	 nobles	 of	 Lanka,	 and	 a	 few	 from	 the
mainland,	rushed	past	us	to	the	palace,	throwing	mud	and	dust	into	our	bowls.
Flies	buzzed	around	and	some	stray	dogs	dared	to	snatch	delicacies	from	the
rows.	In	the	evening,	wooden	barrels	containing	fresh	palm	toddy	were	rolled
down	by	the	palace	servants.	And	another	mad	rush	began.	By	midnight,	all	of
us,	 irrespective	 of	 sex,	 were	 drunk.	 Four	 people	 were	 killed	 in	 brawls	 that
erupted	at	various	places,	but	we	did	not	know	about	it	till	the	next	day.	Not	that
I	cared.	My	situation	got	worse	by	the	day.	The	money	I	earned	was	gone	in	a
week.	 Most	 of	 it	 went	 to	 the	 tavern,	 but	 Mala	 saved	 some	 without	 my
knowledge.	When	I	found	out,	she	had	hell	to	pay.	I	grabbed	it	from	a	kicking
and	screaming	Mala	and	rushed	back	to	the	toddy	shop.	That	was	the	last	day	I
celebrated.
From	 the	 next	 morning,	 hunger	 followed	 us	 like	 a	 determined	 shadow.
Occasionally,	I’d	get	a	few	odd	jobs	and	we	would	eat.	But,	the	recurring	theme
was	 hunger.	 We	 were	 destitute.	 The	 truth	 slowly	 sank	 in.	 Perhaps	 there	 was
some	truth	also	in	what	the	Brahmins	said	about	one’s	previous	life	and	karma.
We	must	have	been	paying	for	the	bad	deeds	of	our	previous	lives.	Most	people
were	 poor,	 so	 there	 must	 have	 been	 many	 sinners	 in	 previous	 lives.	 But	 not
everyone.	 The	 merchant	 class,	 the	 bureaucrats	 and	 government	 servants,	 the

actors	 and	 musicians,	 were	 all	 getting	 fatter	 by	 the	 day.	 We	 saw	 mansions
spring	up	and	shops	selling	glittering	clothing	and	fashionable	footwear	were
frequented	 by	 beautiful	 people	 in	 glistening	 chariots;	 their	 houses	 had	 real
roofs	and	furniture	to	sit	on;	carpets	from	the	distant	lands	to	the	west,	the	cost
of	 one	 could	 have	 fed	 an	 entire	 village	 for	 years;	 smart	 children	 going	 to
gurus	who	taught	only	the	progeny	of	the	rich	and	so	on.	There	were	theatres
too	but	we	were	chased	away	by	the	police	if	we	dared	to	go	near	them.
I	once	knew	how	to	read	and	write.	I	was	even	a	trained	warrior.	Or	were
these	 the	 delusions	 of	 an	 old	 man	 vainly	 imagining	 past	 glories	 and	 brave
deeds?	 I	 was	 not	 sure.	 The	 way	 I	 looked	 now,	 with	 my	 emaciated	 body	 and
cracked	 skin,	 balding	 hair	 and	 sunken	 cheeks,	 nobody	 would	 have	 believed	 I
had	once	been	a	warrior.	I	could	barely	read	now.	Not	that	it	mattered	anymore.
I	was	over	fifty	years	old	and	there	was	nothing	much	left	to	do.	One	day	I	too
would	 be	 carried	 away	 by	 four	 people	 and	 burnt.	 Not	 that	 I	 awaited	 such	 a
journey,	though	I	expressed	the	wish	often.	I	wanted	my	wife	to	comfort	me	by
saying	that	I	was	too	young	to	die.	Recently	though,	I	found	that	any	comments
about	my	mortality	did	not	get	a	response	from	her.	Perhaps	she	wanted	me	to
die.	It	was	not	a	bad	idea.	But	I	was	afraid.	I	did	not	want	to	die.	I	wanted	to	live
forever.
As	I	walked	back	home,	I	gaped	at	the	glittering	lights	that	cast	a	myriad
coloured	 shadows	 and	 reflections	 on	 the	 streets.	 I	 smelt	 the	 perfume	 when	 a
beautiful	woman	passed	by.	Music	softly	floated	around.	A	few	families	were
making	 their	 beds	 on	 the	 pavement.	 Poor	 chaps!	 Perhaps	 they	 were	 from	 the
countryside	or	mainland	India.	They	would	be	chased	away	soon	enough.	The
pavements	were	too	lovely	for	such	dirty	fools	to	sleep	on.	I	walked	past	the
markets	towards	my	home	by	the	river.	Acrid	and	pungent	smells	of	a	thousand
spices	assaulted	my	nostrils.	Shopkeepers	were	closing	up.	Some	fat	ones	sat
counting	 their	 money.	 The	 thugs	 who	 were	 stationed	 outside	 such	 shops,
glowered	at	me	as	I	walked	hurriedly	past	without	making	eye	contact.	I	turned
left	at	the	end	of	the	markets.	Rotten	vegetables	and	fetables	ish	gave	the	corner
its	 characteristic	 smell.	 A	 few	 dogs	 were	 scavenging	 in	 the	 garbage.	 One
barked	hesitantly	at	me.	I	stooped	to	pick	up	a	stone	and	the	dog	shot	past	me
with	its	tail	between	its	legs.	It	was	the	only	creature	afraid	of	me	these	days.
In	the	distance,	Ravana’s	fort	looked	imposing	and	impregnable.	My	son
Athikaya	might	have	been	with	his	master,	prince	Meghanada.	Idiot!	It	had	been
almost	six	months	since	I	had	last	seen	him.	It	was	painful	to	remember	that	he
actually	 belonged	 to	 the	 palace	 and	 I	 was	 just	 his	 keeper.	 What	 if	 I	 had

remained	 in	 my	 village	 on	 the	 Poorna	 river	 and	 my	 family,	 my	 wife	 and
daughter	 had	 lived;	 what	 if	 those	 blasted	 Devas	 had	 not	 attacked	 our	 poor
village?	 Surely	 my	 life	 would	 have	 been	 better	 and	 different.	 Instead,	 I	 had
fought	 for	 a	 King’s	 dream,	 and	 given	 the	 better	 part	 of	 my	 life	 so	 that	 thugs
like	Ravana	could	wallow	in	riches,	glory	and	power.	Alas,	I	had	many	regrets
in	my	life	and	my	life	seemed	to	have	a	mind	of	its	own.	At	least	my	son	ate
well.	 He	 lived	 like	 a	 prince.	 But	 that	 thought	 was	 no	 consolation.	 ‘Why	 only
him?	Why	not	me?’	I	felt	bitter	and	once	again	looked	at	the	glowing	palace.	It
was	then	I	saw	the	strange	sight.	I	stopped	and	watched.	Initially	I	could	not	tell
what	 it	 was.	 Something	 was	 climbing	 up	 the	 citadel.	 A	 thief?	 Which	 foolish
thief	would	dare	break	into	the	palace	of	the	mighty	Asura	Emperor?	He	would
be	 skinned	 alive	 if	 caught.	 I	 waited	 for	 few	 minutes	 to	 see	 if	 there	 were	 any
further	movements	but	all	was	silent.	Perhaps	the	toddy	had	been	stronger	than
I	had	thought.	I	was	about	to	turn	my	eyes	away	and	return	to	my	useless	life,
when	I	saw	him.
He	was	just	a	silhouette	against	the	backdrop	of	the	glowing	palace	and	I
couldn’t	see	his	face.	But	he	was	a	well-built	man	and	stood	atop	the	fort	and
surveyed	the	palace,	with	a	huge	club	on	his	shoulder.	‘Who	was	he?’	 With	a
start,	I	remembered	the	great	Vanara	king,	Bali.	This	man	resembled	him.	But
why	 should	 the	 Vanara	 king	 enter	 the	 Asura	 Emperor ’s	 palace	 in	 stealth?	 I
remembered	the	rumours	that	the	great	Vanara	king	was	dead,	killed	by	some
Deva	hunter	who	had	hidden	behind	a	tree	and	shot	him	on	the	sly.	When	this
man	turned	his	head,	light	reflected	from	the	expensive	ear	stud	he	wore.	‘No,
that	is	not	Bali!’	Then,	with	an	agility	which	only	the	Vanaras	could	aspire	to,
the	man	jumped	down	and	I	saw	the	canopy	of	the	trees	shake	with	the	impact.
Emptiness	 stared	 back	 at	 me	 as	 I	 stood	 frozen.	 Someone	 had	 just	 entered
Ravana’s	palace.	I	stood	there	confused.	‘Should	I	inform	someone?	Or	should	I
just	 go	 home	 and	 sleep?’	 If	 someone	 entered	 the	 King’s	 palace,	 it	 was	 the
King’s	 problem.	 Why	 should	 it	 bother	 me?	 Then	 the	 images	 of	 just	 such	 an
entry	 into	 my	 home	 by	 the	 Devas	 long	 ago,	 flashed	 into	 my	 mind	 and	 I	 ran
back	the	way	I	had	come.	I	had	to	find	someone	who	could	do	something	about
it.	Danger	lurked	around	the	corner.
By	the	time	I	reached	the	police	outpost	on	the	royal	avenue,	I	was	panting
like	a	dog.	But	I	hesitated	as	I	approached	the	station	house.	There	was	a	torch
burning	 brightly	 inside	 and	 four	 guards	 sat	 huddled	 together,	 engrossed	 in	 a
game	of	dice.	A	fat	police	sergeant	slept	with	both	his	feet	perched	on	the	table.
Flies	buzzed	around	the	torch	that	burnt	brightly	in	one	corner.

“Sir,”	I	called	out.	There	was	no	response.	“Sir,”	I	called	again.	One	of	the
guards	raised	his	head	and	his	eyes	grew	big	in	surprise.	I	cowered	as	my	legs
trembled.	‘I’m	not	a	criminal.’	But	I	was	poor	and	that	was	a	bigger	crime.
“What	 do	 you	 want?”	 the	 guard	 barked	 at	 rd	 barkeme.	 He	 was	 clearly
irritated	at	my	intrusion.
“Sir,	I	saw	a	man.	.	.”
“So	 have	 I,”	 and	 he	 laughed	 at	 his	 own	 pathetic	 sense	 of	 humour	 as	 the
others	joined	in.	The	sergeant	opened	his	eyes,	blinked	a	few	times,	and	then
slipped	back	into	slumber.	I	wanted	to	go	back.	Let	the	King	save	himself.	So	I
began	to	walk	out.	“You	there!	How	dare	you	come	here	with	a	stupid	story	and
then	walk	away,”	the	guard	screamed	at	me.
“I	did	not	abuse	you,	sir.”	I	tried	to	gather	some	dignity.
“Are	you	talking	back	to	me?”	And	what	came	next	was	quite	unexpected.
In	 a	 flash,	 he	 was	 upon	 me	 and	 had	 planted	 a	 kick	 between	 my	 legs.	 I
collapsed,	tears	of	anger,	shame	and	pain	blinding	me.
The	other	guards	had	left	their	game.	They	had	found	better	entertainment
–	me.	“You	beggar,	you	scoundrel,	what	are	you	doing	at	this	time	on	the	royal
avenue?”
I	tried	to	parry	the	next	blow	but	I	was	too	weak.	“Sir,	Sir,	please	listen	to
me.	 Someone	 has	 broken	 into	 the	 palace.”	 A	 hit	 across	 my	 face	 sent	 me
sprawled	 onto	 the	 ground.	 The	 policemen	 kicked	 and	 punched	 as	 I	 clawed	 at
the	 ground.	 Then	 suddenly	 it	 stopped.	 When	 I	 raised	 my	 head,	 the	 sergeant
stood	 towering	 over	 me.	 He	 pulled	 me	 up	 by	 my	 sparse	 hair	 and	 I	 blanched.
Then	he	pushed	me	towards	his	table	and	I	collapsed	on	the	floor.	I	looked	up
and	saw	his	heavy	body	perched	on	the	table.	It	creaked	under	his	ample	weight
but	I	found	the	noise	soothing.	Perhaps	the	table	would	break.
“Tell	me.”	He	ordered.	I	remained	silent	so	he	kicked	me.	Then	I	sang.	I
told	him	what	I	had	seen.	A	frown	appeared	on	his	face.	He	chewed	something
and	kept	thinking.	Then	he	told	the	guard.	“You	go	and	tell	the	chief	of	palace
guards.”	 Then,	 as	 an	 afterthought,	 he	 added,	 “Lock	 up	 this	 man.	 He’s	 pig
drunk.”
The	 other	 two	 guards	 dragged	 me	 towards	 the	 dingy	 cell	 in	 the	 corner
and	threw	me	into	a	corner.	They	did	not	bother	to	lock	the	cell	and	returned	to
their	game.	The	other	guard	who	had	been	forced	to	go	on	this	errand,	cursed
me	and	walked	out	in	search	of	the	palace	guards.	I	cursed	myself	for	having

been	 too	 conscientious.	 ‘What	 the	 King	 does	 with	 his	 palace	 is	 none	 of	 my
business.’	I	was	such	a	fool.	Some	lowly	crook	was	lying	in	the	other	corner
of	the	cell.	The	fat	sergeant	had	settled	back	in	his	chair	and	was	snoring	again.
I	hurt	in	places	I	did	not	know	existed.	More	fool	I!	I	sat	there	cursing	my	fate
and	my	foolish,	impulsive	ways	and	slowly	drifted	off	to	sleep.
When	I	awoke,	Lanka	was	burning.

42	Messenger	of	death
Ravana
I	was	woken	by	the	screams	and	commotion	in	my	garden.	People	were
running	 about	 aimlessly.	 Guards	 were	 shouting	 and	 cursing	 each	 other.	 The
palace	 was	 lit	 with	 hundreds	 of	 flaming	 torches.	 Mandodari	 was	 awake,
looking	puzzled.	I	opened	the	door	and	found	the	guards	outside	leaning	over
the	verandah	and	shouting	something.	As	I	walked	nearer	to	them,	they	sprang
to	attention.
“What’s	all	this	noise?”
Gingerly	 a	 senior	 guard	 stepped	 forward	 with	 a	 deep	 bow.	 “Your
Highness,	a	monkey-man	has	sneaked	into	the	royal	gardens	and	was	talking	to
that	Deva	lady.	When	some	of	the	guards	tried	to	capture	him,	he	fought	them
and	even	killed	or	seriously	injured	two	or	three.	Now	he	has	vanished	among
the	trees.”
I	was	shocked.	Monkey-men	sneaking	into	my	palace	gardens	was	beyond
my	imagination.	I	worried	about	my	daughter,	Sita.	She	was	vulnerable	Yunder
the	Ashoka	tree,	though	my	guards	kept	a	watch.	Nevertheless,	I	felt	uneasy.	It
had	been	barely	four	months	since	I	had	heard	about	Bali’s	assassination.	The
King	of	the	monkey-men	had	been	killed	slyly	by	that	Deva	prince,	Rama.	The
Vanaras	were	now	ruled	by	Bali’s	corrupt	and	debauched	brother,	Sugreeva.	It
was	disgusting	the	way	my	son-in-law	had	usurped	Bali’s	power.	That	coward
had	 hidden	 behind	 a	 tree	 and	 shot	 Bali	 through	 the	 heart.	 The	 fact	 that	 Rama
had	done	this	while	Sugreeva	had	been	engaged	in	a	hopeless	and	losing	duel
with	his	brother,	enraged	me	further.	‘What	sort	of	morality	and	ethics	did	my
son-in-law	 follow?’	 I	 had	 been	 tempted	 to	 overthrow	 the	 Vanara	 King	 and
avenge	my	friend’s	death.	I	had	even	ordered	my	army	and	navy	to	attack	the
Vanaras.	But	 after	my	son’s	victory	over	the	entire	Indian	subcontinent,	from

the	 seas	 to	 the	 mighty	 Himalayas,	 my	 appetite	 for	 war	 dwindled.	 Besides,
Sugreeva	had	agreed	to	pay	tribute	to	Meghanada,	and	the	monsoon	had	set	in.
We	postponed	the	plan.
But	as	the	monsoon	started,	Sugreeva,	the	rascal	that	he	was,	reverted	to
his	life	of	debauchery.	I	was	sure	that	with	an	army	of	indisciplined	monkeymen,	 Rama	 would	 not	 start	 any	 foolish	 adventure.	 Obviously	 I	 had	 been	 too
complacent.	The	monkey-man	inside	my	palace	garden	was	proof	enough	and
I	cursed	my	own	lack	of	foresight.
This	was	an	emergency.	The	Council	was	required	to	meet.	I	told	my	wife
to	shut	the	doors	and	windows.	She	seemed	worried	by	my	unusual	caution,	but
I	 ignored	 her	 and	 went	 out,	 slamming	 the	 door	 shut	 with	 a	 bang.	 I	 walked
towards	Meghanada’s	chamber,	but	found	it	open.	The	durbar	was	well	lit	and
the	 guards	 were	 in	 their	 places,	 standing	 to	 attention.	 My	 ministers	 stood
chatting	excitedly	to	each	other.
“Where’s	Prince	Meghanada?”	I	asked,	searching	for	my	son’s	handsome
face.
“Your	 Highness,	 he	 is	 leading	 the	 search	 party	 at	 the	 western	 end,”
Prahastha	replied.
“How	on	earth	did	such	a	security	breach	happen?”	As	I	spoke,	my	anger
resurfaced.	There	was	complete	silence	as	I	banged	a	fist	into	my	palm.	“I	want
an	answer	now!”	I	screamed.	I	felt	better	as	anger	rapidly	replaced	worry.
“He	 sneaked	 in	 through	 the	 west	 side	 wall	 while	 the	 sentries	 slept.	 He
murdered	them	and	then	reached	the	Ashoka-vana.	The	bodies	of	the	sentries
were	found	in	the	drain,	their	throats	slit,”	Prahastha	said	slowly.
“Excellent!	 That	 is	 good!	 Not	 a	 single	 Asura	 saw	 this	 man	 entering
Ravana’s	 fort?	 My	 sentries	 were	 murdered	 in	 their	 sleep.	 I	 have	 more	 than
50,000	soldiers	and	a	single	monkey-man	not	only	escaped	detection	but	still
eludes	 capture.	 So	 much	 for	 your	 vigilance	 and	 intelligence	 network.”	 I	 saw
Prahastha	and	Jambumali	eye	each	other	after	my	tirade.
“Your	 Highness,	 actually,	 a	 derelict	 drunkard	 had	 reported	 to	 the	 police
outpost	at	the	royal	avenue	that	he	saw	a	man	sneaking	into	the	fort.	But...”
“But,	the	officer-in-charge	did	not	want	to	move	from	his	seat.	No	action
was	 taken	 and	 the	 matter	 was	 ignored.	 Isn’t	 that	 what	 you	 want	 to	 tell	 me?”
Where	 was	 Meghanada?	 I	 was	 getting	 worried.	 The	 monkey-man	 could	 be
hiding	 anywhere.	 A	 sly	 arrow	 shot	 from	 the	 top	 of	 a	 tree	 in	 the	 dark	 could
pierce	my	son’s	throat.	This	was	a	dangerous	game.	This	was	not	war.	No	rules
applied	and	worst	of	all,	my	enemies	were	devoid	of	scruples.

An	uneasy	silence	ruled	the	durbar.	We	could	hear	the	noises	outside,	men
running	and	shouting	at	each	oing	at	ether,	the	clanging	of	swords.	Suddenly	I
heard	a	huge	cheer.	Everyone	looked	up.	The	voices	were	calling	“Victory	to
Ravana.	 .	 .	 Victory	 to	 Indrajith.”	 I	 stood	 up	 in	 my	 excitement	 and	 the	 entire
durbar	rose	with	me.	I	wanted	to	run	out	and	see	the	prize	my	son	was	bringing
me	 but	 I	 stood	 there,	 trying	 hard	 to	 conceal	 my	 excitement	 and	 wringing	 my
hands	in	pleasure	and	anticipation.	At	the	head	of	the	procession,	my	tall,	proud
son,	 with	 his	 bow	 firmly	 held	 in	 his	 hand,	 entered	 my	 durbar.	 The	 entire
assembly	 rose	 and	 cheered.	 Asura	 guards	 danced	 around.	 Chenda	 drumbeats
reached	the	highest	crescendo.	I	went	down	and	embraced	my	son.
Then	I	saw	the	tall,	muscular,	dark	Vanara	standing	behind	him.	His	hands
and	legs	were	tied	with	ropes.	Muscles	rippled	across	his	body.	‘I	used	to	have
a	body	like	that	in	my	youth,	like	a	chiselled	statue.’	I	tucked	in	my	belly.	He
stood	almost	as	tall	as	Meghanada.	He	had	curly,	black	hair	all	over	his	body
and	wavy,	black	hair	flowed	on	either	side	of	his	face.	He	looked	a	formidable
warrior.	With	a	start	I	realized	that	he	resembled	Bali,	my	friend,	who	had	been
murdered	slyly	by	Rama.
I	walked	back	to	my	throne	with	deliberate	steps.	The	ministers	returned
to	their	seats.	Meghanada	stood	near	the	Vanara,	his	sword	drawn.	With	a	wave
of	my	hand	I	dismissed	the	Chenda	drummers	and	other	unimportant	persons
from	my	durbar.	Then,	after	a	few	minutes	silence,	I	began	the	interrogation.
The	Vanara	did	not	answer	the	first	few	questions.	He	stood	there	staring	at	me
defiantly.	His	pose	and	self-confidence	were	unsettling.	He	was	in	the	durbar	of
the	 mightiest	 king	 of	 the	 world,	 caught	 as	 a	 spy,	 and	 faced	 with	 nothing	 less
than	 a	 death	 sentence.	 Still	 he	 stood	 there	 as	 casually	 as	 if	 he	 was	 watching
children	playing	games.
I	 looked	 at	 Prahastha	 for	 an	 answer.	 He	 stood	 up,	 but	 before	 he	 could
speak,	the	Vanara	spoke	in	a	deep	voice.	“I	am	Hanuman,	son	of	Maruti,	and	I
have	come	as	an	envoy	from	my	King	and	protector,	Sri	Ramachandra	Prabhu.
I	 demand	 the	 respect	 due	 to	 an	 envoy	 of	 one	 King	 to	 another.	 I	 am	 sure	 the
Emperor	 of	 Asuras,	 the	 learned	 and	 scholarly	 warrior-King	 Ravana	 Prabhu,
would	not	hesitate	to	extend	the	courtesy	due	to	an	envoy	as	per	Raja	Dharma.”
He	ended	the	speech	with	a	smile	that	lit	up	his	face.
“Envoys	 do	 not	 sneak	 in	 at	 midnight,	 Sri	 Hanuman.	 We	 have	 strong
reasons	to	believe	that	you	are	a	spy	and	as	per	the	ethical	codes	of	the	same
Raja	Dharma	you	evoke,	 the	punishment	for	a	spy	is	death.	And	as	far	as	we
know,	 your	 master	 is	 not	 very	 scrupulous	 about	 Raja	Dharma.	 As	 far	 as	 my

limited	 knowledge	 is	 concerned,	 murdering	 unsuspecting	 warriors	 who	 are
engaged	 in	 a	 duel	 with	 someone	 else,	 by	 hiding	 behind	 a	 tree	 and	 slyly
shooting	 them	 down,	 is	 not	 a	 part	 of	 Raja	 Dharma.”	 Prahastha	 spoke	 with
deliberate	firmness.
The	 monkey-man	 looked	 uneasy.	 His	 attempt	 at	 establishing	 a
psychological	 superiority	 was	 effectively	 thwarted	 by	 my	 Prime	 Minister.	 He
tried	another	tactic.	“I	refuse	to	talk	to	you,	Ravana	Maharaja,	when	I	am	bound
by	 ropes.	 Give	 me	 a	 seat	 and	 untie	 my	 bonds	 and	 I	 shall	 answer	 all	 your
questions.”
“Throw	him	into	the	dungeons.	Let	us	see	whett	us	seeher	he	talks	or	not
once	 Rudraka	 starts	 his	 art	 on	 this	 monkey’s	 black	 body,”	 I	 said,	 looking
straight	into	Hanuman’s	eyes,	searching	for	traces	of	fear.	I	could	not	find	any.
The	 man	 remained	 composed	 and	 calm.	 My	 guards	 approached	 him	 and
grabbed	him	by	his	elbows.
Then	my	brother	Vibhishana	rose	to	speak.	I	looked	at	him,	trying	to	hide
my	rising	irritation.	“Your	Highness!	Once	a	man	has	declared	he	is	an	envoy
and	 not	 a	 spy,	 and	 no	 deliberate	 crime	 has	 been	 committed,	 our	 ethical	 code
says	that	he	has	to	be	treated	as	an	envoy.”
“Uncle!”	Meghanada	cried	out,	forgetting	for	a	moment	that	he	was	in	the
durbar,	 “he	 murdered	 two	 of	 our	 guards	 and	 vandalized	 our	 garden.	 He	 is	 a
spy	and	a	criminal.	He	has	to	be	treated	accordingly.”
“Is	 there	 any	 witness	 that	 Hanuman	 killed	 those	 guards?	 As	 long	 as	 his
guilt	 is	 not	 proven,	 he	 is	 innocent.	 I	 am	 not	 asking	 that	 he	 be	 set	 free.	 My
intention	is	to	ensure	that	no	one	accuses	the	Asura	Emperor	of	not	following
propriety	 and	 Raja	 Dharma	 while	 dealing	 with	 an	 uncultured	 Vanara.”
Vibhishana	looked	at	me	as	he	completed	the	last	sentence.
“I	 suggest	 the	 spy	 be	 dealt	 with	 in	 the	 way	 the	 Emperor	 finds	 suitable.”
Prahastha	rose	up	from	his	seat.
‘Asuras.	There’s	not	a	single	thing	in	the	world	that	two	Asuras	will	ever
agree	on.	Always	arguing	and	so	stubborn	about	having	things	done	their	way.’
I	 decided	 like	 a	 wise	 fool	 to	 satisfy	 them	 both.	 “Untie	 him.	 Leave	 only	 his
hands	and	feet	bound.	If	he	wants	to	say	anything,	let	him	stand	and	say	it.	Then
I	shall	decide	what	is	to	be	done	with	him.”
“But	 father.	 .	 .”	 I	 silenced	 Meghanada	 with	 a	 glare	 and	 a	 guard	 slowly
untied	Hanuman’s	bonds.
As	soon	as	the	ropes	were	undone,	Hanuman	spoke.	“I,	Hanuman,	son	of
Maruti,	 of	 Kishkindha,	 minister	 of	 the	 Vanara	 King	 Sugreeva,	 and	 servant	 of

the	 Prince	 of	 Ayodhya,	 Sri	 Ramachandra,	 wish	 to	 give	 His	 Most	 Exalted
Highness,	the	mighty	King	Lankeswara,	some	friendly	advice	from	my	master.
You	 have	 wrongfully	 abducted	 his	 wedded	 wife	 and	 Queen	 of	 Ayodhya,	 and
have	kept	her	in	your	custody.	My	master	requests	you	to	return	his	queen	to
him	with	all	due	respect	and	to	beg	his	forgiveness.	If	this	advice	is	ignored,	I
am	authorized	to	declare	war	on	Lanka	and	the	Asuras,	on	behalf	of	my	master.
We	promise	that,	in	such	an	event,	we	will	crush	you	Asuras,	grind	your	sinful
cities	into	the	dust,	and	reclaim	our	Queen.”
There	was	an	uproar.	A	hundred	swords	were	drawn	from	their	sheaths	in
a	 mighty	 hiss.	 Meghanada	 pressed	 his	 sword	 to	 the	 throat	 of	 the	 impudent
monkey-man.	These	were	multiple	insults.	How	dared	this	monkey	come	and
challenge	 me,	 the	 Asura	 Emperor?	 How	 dared	 he	 do	 so	 in	 the	 name	 of	 a
drunkard	 king	 of	 semi-civilized	 monkey-men?	 How	 dared	 he	 challenge	 the
mightiest	king	the	world	has	ever	seen,	on	behalf	of	a	wandering	hunter	who
mistreated	 his	 wife?	 And	 how	 dared	 he	 challenge	 me	 openly	 in	 front	 of
everyone	in	my	durbar?
“Death	 by	 stoning!”	 I	 roared,	 and	 the	 entire	 durbar	 roared	 with	 me.	 He
stood	there	unfazed,	as	I	pronounced	his	sentence.
Vibhishana	stood	up	slowly	and	the	pandemonium	died	down.	Then,	in	a
very	soft	voice,	he	said,	“Your	Highness,	this	person	has	earned	his	death	and
you	in	your	wisdom	have	given	a	fair	judgment.	He	forfeited	his	right	to	live
when	 he	 ceased	 being	 a	 mere	 envoy.	 His	 language	 was	 more	 suited	 to	 the
battlefield	than	the	cod	than	turt	of	the	most	exalted	Asura	Emperor,	who	rules
all	of	India	and	Lanka.	But.	.	.”	he	paused.
“Come	to	the	point,	Vibhishana.”	I	was	getting	impatient.
“But,	 brother,	 would	 it	 not	 be	 prudent	 to	 send	 him	 back	 with	 our	 own
message?	Let	his	master	also	know	that	Lanka	would	give	a	befitting	reply	if
he	attempted	any	misguided	adventure.	If	we	just	kill	him,	we	lose	the	chance	to
give	them	a	suitable	reply.	We	may	perhaps	avoid	an	unnecessary	war	as	well.
We	can	say	that	we	will	keep	his	wife	hostage	until	he	surrenders	his	brute	of	a
brother,	 Lakshmana,	 to	 us,	 so	 that	 we	 can	 try	 him	 and	 punish	 him	 for	 the
atrocities	he	has	committed	against	our	sister.”
‘He	has	a	point.’	I	thought,	looking	at	Vibhishana.	But	I	was	still	seething
from	the	insult	the	monkey	had	thrown	at	me.
Prahastha	 stood	 up	 and	 turned	 towards	 me	 and	 said,	 “Your	 Highness,
before	we	hastily	kill	him	or	send	him	back,	let	us	get	some	information	from
this	gentleman.	I	request	you	to	give	me	the	honour	of	personally	interrogating

our	esteemed	envoy	from	Sri	Ramachandra.”
I	wavered	in	my	decision.	What	I	wanted	most	at	that	moment	was	to	get
back	 at	 Hanuman.	 He	 could	 not	 come	 to	 my	 durbar,	 insult	 me,	 and	 get	 away
with	it.	It	was	Vibhishana	again	who	found	a	way	out.
“Let	us	brand	him.”	Vibhishana	said	simply.	Branding	with	a	red	hot	iron
or	 fire,	 was	 an	 age-old	 Asura	 practice.	 It	 was	 an	 agonizing	 and	 humiliating
punishment.	 The	 marks	 left	 were	 permanent	 and	 the	 victim	 would	 carry	 the
humiliating	symbol	and	pain	to	his	grave.	The	symbol	would	proclaim	to	the
world	that	he	was	guilty	of	a	great	crime,	and	that	the	mark	of	his	failure	and
guilt	 has	 been	 forcefully	 etched	 on	 his	 body	 for	 the	 whole	 world	 to	 see	 and
snicker	at.	The	more	I	thought	about	it,	the	more	I	liked	it.	This	monkey	would
return	to	his	master	with	Ravana’s	brand.	.	.	where	should	I	brand	him.	.	.	in	his
broad	chest.	.	.	in	his	taut	abdomen.	.	.	or	on	his	broad	back?
“Strip	him	and	brand	his	tail.”
“Your	 Highness,	 I	 suggest	 that	 we	 desist	 from	 such	 a	 dastardly	 and
barbaric	act.	We	should	treat	him	as	a	spy	and	deal	with	him	accordingly.	Let	us
not	stoop	to	such	depths.”	It	was	that	irritating	Prahastha	again.
“Burn	his	tail.	Let	him	know	pain	when	he	sits,	stands,	lies	down	or	walks.
Let	him	know	the	pain	of	insulting	an	Asura	Emperor.”	I	basked	in	the	cheer
that	 arouse	 from	 my	 durbar	 and	 ignored	 Prahastha,	 who	 shook	 his	 head	 in
despair.
My	 guards	 ran	 to	 fetch	 Rudraka.	 The	 chief	 of	 police	 came	 with	 his
assistants	and	bowed	deeply	to	the	court.	Hanuman	remained	unfazed.	This	was
a	 tough	 Vanara.	 I	 was	 getting	 more	 furious	 by	 the	 minute.	 Rudraka’s	 men
prepared	the	molten	lead	for	branding	and	the	fire	roared.	It	was	then	that	the
unthinkable	happened.	With	an	ease	that	belied	the	rope’s	strength,	the	monkeyman	 ripped	 the	 ropes	 that	 bound	 his	 legs	 and	 kicked	 the	 sword	 out	 of
Meghanada’s	hands.	For	a	moment	everyone	was	stunned.	That	was	enough	for
the	 Vanara	 warrior.	 He	 thrust	 his	 hands	 into	 the	 naked	 flames	 and	 burned
through	the	ropes.	Then,	with	his	hands	free,	he	lifted	the	huge	container	that
had	molten	lead	in	it	and	threw	it	at	me.	I	ducked,	but	the	pot	hit	the	silk	curtains
behind	my	throne	with	full	force	and	they	were	set	ablaze.	I	jumped	from	my
pedestal	in	the	nick	of	time	as	the	entire	parasol	above	my	throne	caught	fire
and	fell.	Then	my	durbar	began	to	burn.
There	 was	 utter	 confusion.	 Hanuman	 pushed	 Rudraka	 into	 the	 fire.	 The
burly	police	chief	struggled	ff	struggor	his	life	and	by	the	time	his	men	pulled
him	 out	 and	 smothered	 the	 fire	 that	 threatened	 to	 engulf	 him,	 Hanuman	 had

pulled	 out	 some	 burning	 logs	 and	 set	 fire	 to	 my	 palace.	 Guards	 ran	 like
panicky	 hares.	 Some	 poured	 water	 on	 what	 was	 left	 of	 my	 throne.	 In	 the
confusion,	Hanuman	escaped	to	the	city,	with	burning	logs	held	in	both	hands.
Only	Prahastha	had	the	presence	of	mind	to	throw	his	dagger	at	the	escaping
arsonist,	but	it	narrowly	missed	Hanuman’s	ear	and	hit	the	durbar	door	with	a
twang.	Meghanada	ran	after	him	in	hot	pursuit	but	falling	pieces	of	the	burning
beams	slowed	down	his	chase	considerably.	And	I,	being	the	coward,	ran	for
my	 life.	 I	 called	 Meghanada	 back	 from	 his	 chase.	 We	 could	 catch	 the	 Vanara
any	time,	but	for	now,	the	palace	was	burning.
It	 was	 a	 nightmare.	 Total	 confusion	 and	 panic	 ruled.	 I	 ran	 into	 the
women’s	 quarters	 with	 my	 brother	 and	 the	 others	 who	 were	 following.
Rudraka	shouted,	trying	to	bring	some	semblance	of	order	among	his	men,	but
the	 guards	 fled	 for	 their	 lives,	 ignoring	 his	 orders.	 A	 huge	 burning	 beam
narrowly	missed	us	and	fell	a	few	feet	away,	spluttering	and	hissing	their	like	a
living	 thing.	 The	 heat	 was	 beyond	 imagination.	 A	 thick	 pall	 of	 smoke	 hung
everywhere.	 I	 kicked	 open	 a	 window	 and	 jumped	 out	 and	 landed	 on	 the	 hard
ground	 twelve	 feet	 below.	 Pain	 shot	 up	 from	 my	 ankles	 but	 I	 continued
running.	I	could	hear	screams	from	my	harem.	The	fire	had	almost	burnt	down
my	 durbar	 and	 was	 swiftly	 moving	 towards	 the	 surrounding	 buildings.	 And
there	 in	 front	 of	 me,	 my	 city	 burned.	 Orange	 flames	 licked	 thatched	 roofs
clean.	A	thousand	screams	of	panic	and	death	echoed	through	the	skies.	People
ran	from	their	homes.	A	few	brave	ones	fought	the	fire	but	were	fast	losing	the
battle.	 The	 acrid	 smell	 of	 burning	 flesh,	 wood,	 and	 clothes,	 filled	 the	 air.
Horses	bolted	from	their	stables	and	ran	madly	through	the	streets,	kicking	and
trampling	people	in	their	way.	I	ran	towards	my	harem.	My	wife	was	there,	my
sons	 were	 there.	 I	 had	 to	 save	 them.	 But	 the	 flames	 beat	 me	 in	 the	 race.	 The
entire	 roof	 of	 the	 palace	 caught	 fire.	 My	 throat	 was	 hoarse	 from	 shouting
instructions	and	orders.	But	there	was	no	one	to	listen.	‘Where	were	my	guards?
Where	 was	 my	 mighty	 army?	 Where	 were	 my	 ministers?’	 I	 stood	 and	 watched
helplessly	as	my	palace	burned	down.
It	was	then	that	I	saw	the	huge	black	figure	running	recklessly	towards	the
burning	 harem.	 I	 called	 out	 for	 the	 mad	 man	 to	 stop	 but	 he	 dived	 into	 the
raging	 fire	 and	 disappeared.	 I	 stood	 dazzled	 by	 this	 display	 of	 courage
‘Perhaps	he	was	 raving	mad.’	 By	 this	 time,	 a	 few	 of	 my	 ministers,	 including
Prahastha,	had	joined	me,	but	I	dared	not	to	say	a	word	to	them.	Rudraka	had
brought	some	sort	of	order	and	his	men	tried	desperately	to	douse	the	fire.	Part
of	the	palace	had	been	burnt	completely,	and	it	looked	like	the	fire	was	being

brought	under	control	on	east	side	at	least.	But	the	fire	had	ravaged	the	harem
and	I	tried	not	to	think	about	the	plight	of	my	family.
About	 sixty	 elephants	 were	 brought	 in	 to	 fight	 the	 fire.	 Then	 the	 huge
black	figure	which	had	disappeared	inside	the	burning	harem,	jumped	out	of	a
first	floor	balcony,	cleared	the	fire	and	rolled	onto	the	lawn.	It	was	then	that	I
saw	he	was	carrying	my	queen,	Mandodari,	on	his	back.	We	rushed	towards	the
man.	As	we	approached,	I	recognized	him	with	a	start.	It	was	none	other	than
my	illegitimate	son,	Athikaya.	He	was	fussing	over	the	Queen,	trying	to	revive
her.	I	saw	that	his	hands	had	been	badly	burnt.	But	before	I	could	say	anything,
Athikaya	ran	back	into	the	burning	palace.	This	time,	an	entire	group	of	guards
followed	 him.	 The	 intensity	 of	 the	 fire	 had	 come	 down	 but	 it	 was	 still
dangerous.
The	 fire	 wa">The	 fis	 slowly	 controlled	 inside	 the	 palace,	 but	 outside,	 it
continued	 to	 rage.	 Somewhere	 in	 my	 mind,	 I	 registered	 that	 Meghanada	 and
Jambumali	 had	 rushed	 out	 of	 the	 palace	 towards	 the	 city	 to	 direct	 the	 firefighting	activities	there.	Rudraka	had	renewed	his	search	for	the	monkey-man
who	 had	 wrecked	 such	 ruin.	 But	 I	 was	 beyond	 any	 thought	 of	 revenge	 or
punishment.	I	was	too	dazed	and	overwhelmed	by	the	sudden	and	horrific	turn
of	events.	I	was	worried	sick	about	my	Queen.	Guards	brought	out	bodies	from
the	harem.	Some	were	alive	but	gravely	burnt,	or	unconscious,	others	charred
to	death	beyond	recognition.
Slowly,	my	Queen	opened	her	eyes.	I	hugged	her.	I	could	not	control	my
tears.	But	she	pushed	me	away	and	struggled	to	stand,	not	bothering	to	cover
her	bosom,	“Akshaya,	where	is	my	Akshaya?”	she	muttered.	I	looked	around.
Where	was	my	little	boy,	my	eight-year-old	Akshaya	Kumara?	I	stood	up	but
feared	the	worst.	I	did	not	have	the	courage	to	face	my	wife.	Prahastha	bowed
and	called	the	guards	and	whispered	something.	They	ran	towards	the	palace.
But	 I	 noticed	 everyone	 avoided	 my	 eyes.	 I	 told	 myself	 not	 to	 lose	 courage.
Shiva	would	protect	my	boy.	I	hoped	against	hope.	I	barked	out	orders,	search
here,	look	there.	.	.	a	lot	of	nonsense.	I	knew	it	was	futile.	But	I	wanted	to	do
something.
A	 wail	 came	 from	 behind	 me	 but	 I	 was	 afraid	 to	 turn.	 Someone	 put	 a
comforting	 hand	 on	 my	 shoulder,	 but	 it	 failed	 to	 comfort	 me.	 I	 was	 angry.	 I
knew	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 wail	 and	 the	 man	 who	 had	 caused	 it.	 But	 then	 my
anger	passed	and	I	collapsed	like	an	old	rag.	The	warm	ash-strewn	ground	hit
me	in	the	face.	I	lay	there,	my	face	bleeding,	my	tears	mingling	with	my	blood.
I	 could	 hear	 footsteps	 and	 whispers.	 My	 men	 were	 afraid	 to	 come	 near	 me.

Maybe	they	respected	my	grief.	Or	was	it	just	voyeurism?	Who	knew	and	who
cared?	 Ravana’s	 sorrow	 was	 his	 own.	 Why	 should	 I	 share	 my	 grief	 with	 this
indifferent	and	cruel	world?	My	boy,	my	little	prince,	had	been	burnt	alive	like
a	chicken.	No,	I	did	not	want	to	see	him	now.	Let	my	last	memory	of	him	be
that	 beautiful	 smiling	 face.	 The	 innocence,	 the	 curiosity	 about	 the	 world,	 the
charm,	the	little	one	wove	in	this	serious	and	cruel	world,	and	made	it	bearable
for	 an	 arrogant	 brute	 like	 me,	 had	 been	 taken	 away.	 I	 staggered	 up.	 Through
the	 hazy	 light,	 I	 saw	 my	 wife	 cruelly	 beating	 someone.	 Some	 people	 tried	 to
tear	her	from	the	huge	black	crouching	figure	of	Athikaya.	“Why	did	you	save
me	alone.	.	.how	could	you	leave	my	little	boy	who	was	sleeping	with	his	hands
over	me.	.	.you	brute.	.	.”
She	pummelled	the	huge	man	with	all	her	strength.	He	just	stood	there,	his
head	 bent	 in	 shame	 and	 guilt.	 Or	 was	 it	 anger	 at	 this	 cruel	 and	 undeserving
treatment	 from	 someone	 whose	 life	 he	 had	 saved	 at	 the	 risk	 of	 his	 own?	 I
didn’t	know	nor	did	I	care.	Athikaya	and	their	anger	or	guilt	was	not	important
to	me.	I	have	just	lost	my	little	one.	I	walked	towards	the	row	of	bodies	neatly
laid	out	on	my	once-green	lawn.	Grotesque	shapes	awaited	me.	I	kept	walking
and	then	I	found	the	little	bundle.	Guards	bowed	respectfully,	but	I	would	not
have	 cared	 if	 they	 had	 spat	 on	 my	 face.	 I	 took	 the	 charred	 little	 body	 in	 my
arms.	The	little	face	leered	at	me	from	its	burned	blackness.	My	boy	mocked
everything	about	me…	my	vanity,	my	life,	my	achievements,	my	ego.	I	knew	it
and	 was	 angry	 at	 fate	 and	 at	 the	 Gods	 who	 had	 done	 this	 to	 me.	 My	 servants
came	running	to	take	over	my	burden,	but	I	refused.	This	was	my	burden	and	I
would	carry	it	alone.	Was	anything	worth	this?	Was	my	kingdom	worth	it?	To
save	one	child,	I	had	sacrificed	another.	I	had	brought	disaster	on	the	people	I
was	supposed	to	protect.
Then,	shattering	the	deadly	silence	of	the	night,	I	heard	the	cruel	laughter
of	my	daughter,	Sita.	“Ravana,	you	wicked	Asura!	You	deserve	your	fate.	You
and	 all	 your	 kin	 will	 die	 such	 horrible	 deaths	 at	 the	 hands	 of	 my	 husband,
Rama	of	Ayodhya.”
‘I	 deserved	 it	 my	 daughter?	 I	 deserved	 it?	 I	 just	 sacrificed	 your	 little
brother	for	you.	I	may	lose	everything	but	still	I	will	stand	up	for	you.	Once	I
forsook	you,	but	never	again.	You	will	understand	what	sort	of	a	husband	you
have,	 only	 when	 the	 protection	 of	 your	 old	 father	 ends.	 Then,	 alas,	 my	 dear
daughter,	it	will	be	too	late.’	I	wanted	to	yell	all	these	things	at	Sita	but	I	had	no
strength	left.	I	walked	away	alone,	carrying	the	dead	weight	of	my	little	prince,

into	 the	 dark	 depths	 of	 the	 night.	 Perhaps,	 there	 I	 would	 find	 some	 solace,
someone	to	dry	my	tears,	and	where	I	could	lay	myself	in	the	lap	of	darkness.	I
kept	walking,	my	dead	little	one	sleeping	peacefully	in	my	arms.

43	Let	my	city	burn
Bhadra
The	city	was	burning.	The	policemen	had	vanished	and	the	front	section
of	the	police	station	was	on	fire.	My	escape	route	had	been	blocked	and	at	any
moment	 the	 fire	 would	 reach	 my	 cell.	 Thick	 curls	 of	 smoke	 billowed	 in	 as	 I
sputtered	and	choked.	I	was	trapped.	I	tried	to	run	through	the	raging	fire	but
lost	 my	 nerve	 when	 faced	 with	 the	 intense	 heat	 radiating	 from	 the	 inferno.	 It
had	become	difficult	to	breath.	I	did	not	know	what	to	do	but	I	am	a	survivor.
But	this	time	I	wasn’t	so	sure.	The	orange	tongues	of	flame	hungrily	devoured
everything	in	their	path.	A	part	of	the	roof	collapsed	and	the	dark	sky	burst	into
the	room.	The	smoke	escaped	and	the	air	cleared	a	bit.
I	tried	scrambling	up	the	wall	but	could	not	find	anything	to	hold	onto	and
fell	back	again.	I	searched	for	something	to	stand	on.	The	inspector ’s	table	was
burning	as	a	huge	beam	from	the	roof	had	fallen	across	it.	I	tried	pulling	it	out
and	finally,	after	many	anxious	and	tense	moments,	it	yielded.	I	pushed	it	hard
towards	 the	 wall.	 My	 hands	 burned	 but	 I	 was	 barely	 aware	 of	 the	 pain.	 That
would	come	later.	I	stepped	onto	the	table	and	then	jumped	over	the	wall	and	I
ran	for	my	life.
It	 was	 utter	 chaos	 outside.	 Houses,	 shops	 and	 everything	 on	 the	 streets,
were	burning.	I	could	see	the	palace	burning	in	the	distance.	I	ran	towards	my
house.	 The	 fire	 had	 killed	 people	 indiscriminately.	 Brahmins,	 untouchables,
slaves,	 barbers,	 merchants,	 drunkards,	 pious	 men,	 guards,	 gamblers,
prostitutes,	old	ladies,	babies,	saints,	rowdies	–	were	all	dead.	The	acrid	smell
of	burning	flesh	filled	the	sky.	Many	were	trampled	upon.	A	few	were	barely
alive.	 Some	 were	 fighting	 the	 fire.	 Others	 wailed	 the	 loss	 of	 loved	 ones	 and
possessions.	 I	 ran	 through	 the	 streets	 where	 death	 had	 done	 its	 fiery	 dance.	 I
was	afraid	and	hungry	but	I	kept	running.	I	do	not	know	how	or	why	but	as	I

left	 the	 main	streets	and	 turned	 towards	the	humbler	 dwellings,	 I	 saw	 the	fire
had	 not	done	 much	damage	there.	People	 had	come	 out	and	were	gawking	at
the	 raging	 inferno	 licking	 our	 city	 clean.	 Many	 tried	 to	 stop	 me	 and	 enquire
what	was	going	on.	I	continued	running.	All	I	wanted	was	to	reach	home	and
get	away	from	kings,	palaces,	spies,	and	their	deadly	games.	Let	the	city	burn
and	men	and	woman	die,	I	wanted	to	be	safe	in	my	house.	By	the	time	I	reached
my	street,	it	all	seemed	like	a	bad	dream.	The	silence	was	only	broken	by	a	few
stray	dogs	chasing	the	huge	rats	that	infested	our	gutters.
As	 I	 reached	 home,	 I	 was	 startled	 to	 see	 the	 door	 slightly	 ajar.	 I	 slowly
entered,	ignoring	the	creaking	noise	of	the	old	wooden	door	as	I	opened	it.	In
the	faint	light	I	saw	the	silhouette	of	my	snoring	wife,	blissfully	unaware	of	the
raving	 fire	ravishing	 her	 city.	I	cursed	her	and	 moved	to	my	bed.	It	was	then
that	 I	 saw	 someone	 lying	 on	 my	 bed.	 I	 was	 startled.	 The	 flickering	 light
emanating	 from	 the	 burning	 city	 did	 not	 illuminate	 the	 figure.	 I	 searched	 for
my	dagger,	but	could	not	find	it	at	my	waist.	I	was	too	afraid	to	molve.
“Father.	.	.”	the	voice	trembled.
“Who.	.	.?”	I	shivered.
“It	is	Athikaya.	.	.”
“Why.	 .	 .	 you	 fool.	 .	 .	 you.	 .	 .you.	 .	 .”	 I	 moved	 towards	 the	 figure	 now
sitting	up	on	the	bed,	with	his	head	buried	in	his	hands.
“I	killed	the	Prince.	.	.I	killed	him.	.	.”
“What.	.	.?!”	What	had	this	fool	done?	Had	he	killed	Prince	Meghanada?
What	was	going	to	happen	now?	I	began	to	panic.	‘Would	the	entire	army	hunt
us	down?’	My	wife	woke	and	blabbered	incoherently.	I	screamed	at	her	and	she
cowed	 down.	 I	 shook	 Athikaya	 and	 slapped	 him	 hard	 across	 his	 face.	 “Idiot!
you	wake	up	and	stop	talking	nonsense..	stupid	fool.”
Then,	bit	by	bit,	I	extracted	what	had	happened.	I	was	relieved	to	find	that
this	stupid	son	of	my	mine	had	played	no	part	in	the	death	of	the	little	prince.
Rather,	he	was	the	hero	who	had	rescued	the	Queen.	Then	I	felt	bitter.	‘No	one,
neither	the	King	nor	all	those	fair-skinned	ones	who	hung	around	him,	will	ever
acknowledge	the	heroics	deeds	of	people	like	us.	No	bards	will	ever	sing	paeans
to	 the	 selfless	 acts	 done	 by	 common	 people	 like	 us.	 Forget	 the	 bards.	 Who
needed	them?’
I	left	my	wife	to	fuss	over	my	incoherent	son.	Outside,	the	sky	was	tinged
red	in	the	east	by	the	rising	sun	and	by	the	burning	city	in	the	west.	Wearily	I
stretched	my	limbs	and	walked	towards	the	river	wondering	what	the	monkey-

man	had	gained	by	killing	innocent	babies,	men	and	women,	and	setting	fire	to
a	beautiful	palace.	The	procession	of	the	dead	had	started	towards	the	funeral
ground	on	the	other	side	of	the	river.	I	could	not	see	the	faces	of	the	men	and
women	who	accompanied	the	bier,	but	I	could	imagine	their	teary	eyed	faces.	I
watched	indifferently	as	the	first	pyre	was	lit,	and	thick	smoke	curled	into	the
sky.	 I	 went	 home	 and	 sat	 on	 my	 mud	 verandah	 to	 watch	 the	 smoke	 over	 my
burning	city.

44	Messenger	of	peace
Ravana
It	was	Prahastha	who	insisted	that	I	come	out	and	take	a	look	at	the	city.	I
was	angry	with	him	at	the	time,	but	he	insisted.	He	told	me	it	was	the	duty	of	the
King	 to	 see	 how	 his	 subjects	 suffered	 and	 to	 take	 action	 to	 mitigate	 that
suffering.	I	shouted	at	him	and	even	threatened	to	dismiss	him,	to	behead	him.
But	he	stood	his	ground	without	saying	anything	in	return	other	than	to	calmly
insist	that	I	do	my	duty.	Finally	he	wore	me	down	and	cursing,	I	agreed.
I	 saw	 the	 horrible	 sufferings	 that	 had	 been	 inflicted	 upon	 my	 citizens.	 I
walked	with	Prahastha,	dressed	in	simple	clothes	and	ceased	to	be	a	king.	I	was
a	 fellow	 sufferer.	 Houses	 were	 gutted,	 streets	 were	 strewn	 with	 odd	 rags	 and
charred	furniture.	Heaps	of	trash	lay	smouldering	in	various	corners,	looking
suspiciously	like	flesh.	Many	buildings	had	collapsed	and	broken	walls,	black
with	soot,	stood	haphazardly.	Some	had	only	windows	or	doorframes	with	no
roof	above.	Some	buildings	had	only	a	few	pillars	standing	in	the	mounds	of
smoldering	ash.	They	looked	like	relatives	stricken	by	grief,	standing	around
the	funeral	pyre	of	a	loved	one.	Men	and	women	stood	in	corners,	devastated
by	 their	 loss	 and	 stunned	 by	 the	 suddenness	 of	 it	 all.	 I	 heard	 the	 stifling	 sobs
and	occasional	wails	that	broke	through	the	thick	walls	of	the	houses	that	stood
precariously	on	the	verge	of	collapse.	Half	burnt,	animal	carcasses	lay	strewn
around.	It	was	sickening.	I	wanted	to	go	back	to	the	palace	and	get	away	from
this	scene	of	abject	human	misery.	The	loss	of	my	young	son	seemed	small	in
comparison.p>	 <p><font	 size="-1">But	 the	 sudden	 thought

of	 my	 dead	 son	 opened	 the	 flood-gates	 of	 sorrow.	 I
looked	 pleadingly	 at	 Prahastha	 but	 he	 only	 looked	 grim.
Unable	 to	 control	 my	 tears,	 I	 was	 also	 angry	 at	 the

monkey-man,	 at	 Prahastha,	 at	 the	 world	 at	 large,	 for
bringing	 me	 to	 this	 situation.	 But	 I	 was	 too	 stunned	 to
move.	The	road	was	soggy	with	soot	and	water	and	mud
clung	 to	 my	 clothes	 and	 sandals.	 A	 sickening	 breeze
wafted	through	these	lanes	of	death.	I	was	overcome	and
retched,	clutching	my	stomach	as	I	emptied	myself	on	the
road.	It	was	then	that	an	old	woman	recognized	me.	She
came	running	from	her	house,	letting	out	a	high-pitched
shriek.	I	was	taken	aback	and	stopped	retching.<font>
“You	 scoundrel!	 See	 what	 your	 lust	 has	 brought	 us	 to!”	 she	 screamed.
Prahastha	tried	to	stop	her	but	she	pushed	him	away	with	great	force.	Then	she
beat	 her	 breasts	 and	 wailed,	 “I	 brought	 up	 two	 fine	 sons	 with	 so	 many
sacrifices.	Their	wives,	my	grandchildren,	all	gone.	All	gone	in	the	flames	of
your	lust.	.	.you	have	a	wife	like	an	angel	and	you	still	have	to	lust	over	Deva
women?	And	see	what	she	has	brought	to	us	Asuras.”
A	 crowd	 gathered	 around	 her.	 There	 were	 angry	 murmurs	 and	 some
clenched	fists.	I	stood	pinned	to	the	ground.	I	was	afraid	they	would	lynch	me
to	death.	What	kind	of	a	ruler	was	I?	I	felt	disgusted.	Lanka	burnt	on	all	sides.
Whatever	 I	 had	 built,	 whatever	 my	 people	 had	 built	 with	 their	 dreams,
ambition,	passion	and	hard	work,	lay	crumbled	in	ruins	around	me.	I	had	failed
as	a	king.	I	could	not	protect	my	citizens	from	a	lowly	monkey.	I	was	a	failure
as	a	father.	I	could	not	protect	my	small	son	from	being	roasted	alive.	I	was	a
loser.	It	needed	Prahastha	to	make	me	come	out	to	see	and	empathize	with	my
fellow	 sufferers.	 My	 knees	 gave	 away	 and	 I	 collapsed	 on	 the	 ground.	 With
trembling	hands,	I	tried	to	touch	the	feet	of	the	angry	old	woman.
“Mother.	.	.forgive	me.	.	.I.	.	.I.	.	.”	A	gasp	went	through	the	crowd.
Prahastha	 lifted	 me	 up	 but	 the	 old	 woman	 fell	 at	 my	 feet.	 “Forgive	 me
your	Highness.	.	.you	are	our	Emperor.	.	.you	should	not	fall	at	my	feet.”	She
dissolved	into	sobs.	The	crowd	which	had	been	angry	enough	to	lynch	me	to
death	suddenly	became	indifferent	and	moved	away	as	I	staggered	towards	my
charred	palace,	leaning	on	the	old	but	strong	arm	of	my	Prime	Minister.

“Jai	to	Ravana.”	Someone	cried	out	and	then	the	entire	crowd	responded
in	unison,	“Har	Har	Mahadev!”
“We	will	follow	you	unto	death	sir!”	someone	yelled.
“Death	to	the	Devas.	.	.”	another	voice	joined	in.
“Lead	 the	 Asuras	 to	 victory.	 .	 .we	 shall	 avenge	 the	 brutal	 attack	 sir.	 We
shall	build	the	city	back	with	our	hands;	brick	by	brick.”
“Har	Har	Mahadev!”	shouted	a	hundred	voices.	“Death	to	Rama	and	death

to	the	monkey-men.”
I	could	feel	the	energy	flood	into	my	veins	as	I	climbed	up	to	my	citadel.	I
was	no	longer	afraid	of	Prahastha.	I	could	see	the	streets	full	of	my	people.	The
crowd	 was	 electric.	 Thousands	 of	 swords	 glistened	 in	 the	 sun.	 I	 waved	 my
hands	and	a	huge	uproar	went	through	the	crowd.
“Let	us	rebuild	Lanka!”	I	cried	and	was	greeted	by	another	uproar	of	Har
Har	Mahadeva!	 “By	 Shiva,	 we	 shall	 avenge	 this	 brutal	 attack	 of	 the	 monkeymen	and	the	Devas.”
“Yes	we	shall!”	answered	the	crowd.
Prahastha	 stood	 smiling	 beside	 me.	 I	 whispered	 to	 him,	 “Let	 us	 start
rebuilding	 the	 city.”	 He	 bowed	 and	 left	 my	 side	 to	 make	 arrangements	 in	 his
usual	 efficient	 manner.	 The	 bumbling	 but	 brilliant	 Professor	 Mayan,	 the
minister	of	city	administration	and	engineering,	was	summoned	 and	he	came
running	like	 a	 happy	child	being	offered	a	treat.	As	the	cities	had	grown	and
developed,	 he	 had	 been	 left	 with	 the	 monotonous	 job	 of	 administrating	 them
efficiently.	Now	he	was	being	again	given	another	chance	to	rebuild	the	burnt
city	and	return	it	to	its	past	glory.	I	left	my	two	ministers	busy	in	consultation.
The	palace	was	in	darkness	and	I	returned	to	the	reality	of	my	dead	son
and	my	personal	loss.	The	energy	I	had	built	from	the	cries	of	thousands	of	my
citizens	 and	 their	 never-say-die	 spirit,	 left	 me	 at	 the	 doorway	 to	 my	 palace.
Noises	of	a	city	walking	from	the	dead	filtered	through	the	dark	and	gloomy
curtains	 of	 my	 palace,	 but	 sitting	 alone,	 buried	 in	 my	 personal	 tragedy,	 I
became	just	a	grieving	father	who	had	lost	his	little	one.	Even	the	love	of	my
subjects,	looked	frivolous	to	me.	Everything	seemed	a	pretence,	even	my	grief
before	the	woman	in	the	street.	‘Had	I	really	felt	empathy	towards	that	grieving
woman?	Or	was	it	an	instinctive	reaction	to	save	myself	from	the	angry	crowd
itching	to	lynch	me	to	death?	Have	I	led	many	people	to	misery	and	death,	just
to	achieve	my	personal	ambitions?’	the	doubts	lingered.	My	mind	felt	numb.	‘I
loved	my	people.	Had	I	not	built	an	empire	out	of	nothing?	And	had	I	not	given
back	self-respect	and	pride	to	a	battered	and	oppressed	people?But,	what	if	it
was	 all	 guided	 by	 selfishness	 and	 not	 by	 ideals?’	 Why	 I	 am	 thinking	 in	 this
way?	 Had	 I	 not	 glorified	 selfishness	 and	 greed	 as	 the	 two	 great	 pillars	 of
human	progress?	But	then,	why	was	I	feeling	like	scum?	Why	was	I	am	feeling
like	a	charlatan	who	had	led	his	people	to	gloom	and	hell?
The	 door	 creaked	 and	 after	 a	 moment	 of	 pregnant	 silence,	 the	 tall
silhouette	 of	 my	 Queen	 appeared	 in	 the	 slanting	 sunlight	 at	 the	 door.	 Slowly,
she	walked	to	me	and	sat	down.	I	did	not	dare	to	stir	and	look	at	her.	I	knew	my

eyes	were	moist	and	any	movement	on	my	part	would	expose	the	tears	waiting
to	flow	over	the	rims	of	my	eyes.	She	put	her	hands	on	my	shoulders	and	tears
began	to	trickle	down	my	cheeks.
“I	will	be	with	you	always.	Do	not	leave	Sita	to	her	husband.	We	do	not
know	how	he	will	treat	her.	Whatever	may	come,	we	shall	face	it	together.	She
is	our	daughter.	I	understand	you,	Ravana.”
I	shook	my	head.	‘If	my	daughter	did	not	want	my	protection,	why	should	I
sacrifice	everything	for	her?’	Till	then,	I	hadn’t	thought	of	returning	her	to	her
barbarian	 husband,	 but	 as	 Mandodari	 raised	 the	 issue,	 I	 began	 to	 think	 of
returning	 her	 to	 her	 fate	 and	 continuing	 with	 my	 life.	 ‘Who	 am	 I	 to	 bring
destruction	to	my	own	people	for	the	selfish	reason	of	saving	my	daughter?’	I
may	not	have	been	a	perfect	human	being	or	a	perfect	king,	but	I	did	not	want
the	curse	of	mothers	who	had	lost	their	children	and	their	dignity,	to	haunt	me
forever.	Enough!	I	would	call	Vibhishana	and	ask	him	to	return	Sita	to	Rama.
As	 if	 reading	 my	 thoughts,	 Mandodari	 said,	 “No,	 Ravana,	 no.	 We	 know
how	Devas	treat	women.	Now	that	she	has	lived	among	us,	they	would	consider
her	impure.	We	have	already	lost	one	child.”	She	squeezed	my	shoulders	hard.
“Let	us	not	lose	another.”
“Prahastha	seeks	audience	in	the	durbar,”	announced	a	guard.	I	stood	up
without	looking	at	my	wife,	went	to	the	be	child.asin	and	washed	my	face.	In	the
cold	water,	I	allowed	my	tears	to	flow	freely.	When	I	looked	into	the	mirror,	I
saw	 an	 old	 man	 staring	 back	 at	 me.	 He	 had	 grey	 hair	 and	 stubble.	 The	 dark
circles	 around	 his	 puffy	 eyes	 and	 wrinkles,	 gave	 him	 the	 appearance	 of	 a
broken	 man.	 Where	 had	 youth	 gone?	 Where	 was	 the	 Ravana	 who	 had
challenged	the	Gods?	Where	was	that	King	who	had	wanted	to	achieve	so	much
in	life	that	he	had	not	cared	about	the	feelings	of	others?	Where	was	the	fiery
youth	 who	 had	 led	 battles	 after	 battles	 and	 destroyed	 cities,	 slaughtered	 men
and	 woman,	 and	 built	 an	 empire	 that	 stretched	 from	 this	 Pearl	 Island	 to	 the
southern	banks	of	the	Narmada	on	the	mainland,	the	man	who	gave	the	Asuras
self-respect	and	more	glory	than	the	legendry	King	Mahabali?	And	where	had
the	love	for	nature,	music,	art	and	life,	vanished?	Where	was	Ravana?
The	answer	stood	at	the	door,	with	his	head	held	high,	his	bearing	proud
and	manly.	Ravana,	with	the	fire	to	conquer	and	the	hunger	to	live,	Ravana	in
his	youthful	glory	and	a	million	dreams,	Ravana	of	the	unquenchable	zest	for
all	the	good	things	in	life.	The	Ravana	missing	in	the	mirror	stood	at	the	door,
beckoning	me	back	to	life.	It	was	Meghanada.	“Father,	the	Council	of	Ministers
are	waiting	for	you.”

I	 turned	 and	 adjusting	 my	 angavastra,	 put	 a	 hand	 on	 Meghanada’s
shoulder.	 I	 could	 not	 afford	 to	 wallow	 in	 self-pity,	 I	 had	 a	 country	 to	 rule.
Drawing	 energy	 from	 the	 youthful	 fire	 of	 my	 son,	 I	 walked	 to	 my	 durbar
leaning	on	him	a	little,	to	take	on	my	life	again.	I	left	my	sobbing	wife	behind
and	listened	to	the	sounds	carried	in	by	the	breeze	–	the	sound	of	the	Asuras,
my	beloved	people,	rebuilding	their	city	and	their	lives	after	a	brutal	terrorist
attack.	Hope	began	to	sprout	again.	I	left	my	son	behind	and	entered	the	durbar.
As	 I	 sat	 on	 my	 throne,	 I	 could	 not	 help	 but	 notice	 that	 the	 repair	 work	 was
shoddy.	Brushing	away	this	little	irritation,	I	began	the	proceedings.	And	in	my
mind,	 once	 again,	 I	 became	 the	 Emperor	 and	 the	 greatest	 monarch	 on	 earth.
There	were	many	more	battles	to	be	won.
We	 sat	 discussing	 war	 plans.	 I	 personally	 itched	 for	 revenge.	 Though	 I
wanted	Rama	to	be	captured	alive	for	the	sake	of	my	daughter,	I	wanted	to	slit
Lakshmana’s	throat	for	what	he	had	done	to	my	sister	and	kill	Hanuman	with
my	 bare	 hands.	 I	 was	 impatient	 with	 the	 endless	 war	 planning	 and	 strategy.	 I
could	 see	 the	 same	 impatience	 in	 Meghanada	 too.	 Nevertheless,	 Vibhishana
pitched	 for	 one	 last	 peace	 effort.	 He	 said	 that	 he	 would	 personally	 go	 as	 an
emissary	and	reason	with	Rama.	Prahastha	was	of	the	opinion	that	it	would	be
dangerous	for	a	prince	of	Lanka	to	go	to	the	barbarians	for	peace	talks.	They
could	 hold	 him	 hostage	 and	 demand	 Sita’s	 release	 in	 return.	 Finally,	 it	 was
decided	 that	 Vibhishana	 would	 go	 with	 a	 sizable	 army	 and	 Varuna’s	 navy
would	protect	him	from	the	sea.	Vibhishana	also	assured	us	that	if	required,	he
would	use	force	and	capture	Rama,	if	he	did	not	see	reason.
Prahastha	 was	 dead	 against	 any	 such	 move.	 “We	 should	 move	 fast	 and
finish	off	Rama’s	puny	little	army.	We	shouldn’t	lose	the	advantage	of	surprise.
Regular	rules	of	war	are	not	applicable	this	time	as	they	began	the	offensive	by
first	deforming	an	Asura	princess	and	indulging	in	terrorist	activities	against
the	Asura	empire.”	Vibhishana	didn’t	agree.	I	grew	tired	and	told	Vibhishana	he
could	 go	 as	 an	 emissary.	 I	 also	 instructed	 Varuna	 to	 stand	 by	 as	 a	 back-up	 if
Rama	tried	any	of	his	ignoble	Deva	tricks.
Prahastha	 was	 furious,	 but	 once	 I	 had	 made	 my	 decision,	 he	 carried	 out
the	arrangements	to	ensure	that	Prince	Vibhishana	got	the	best	trained	platoons
to	accompany	him	on	his	mission.	Wearily,	I	disbanded	the	court	and	returned
to	my	room.	I	was	tird	platooed	and	needed	to	sleep	after	having	cremated	my
little	son	just	hours	before.

45	Looming	war
Bhadra
The	 siege	 began.	 Essentials	 disappeared	 from	 the	 market.	 Prices	 shot
through	the	roof.	Bad	times	had	come.	But	people	like	me,	with	our	calloused
hands	 and	 coarse	 dress	 –	 invisible,	 irrelevant	 and	 silent,	 we	 suffered	 even
during	 good	 times.	 In	 bad	 times	 we	 starved	 and	 died.	 We	 discussed	 the
impending	 war	 in	 hushed	 tones.	 Many	 of	 the	 younger	 generations	 had	 never
seen	 even	 small	 skirmishes,	 let	 alone	 wars.	 True,	 some	 had	 accompanied
Meghanada	 on	 his	 northern	 campaigns,	 but	 those	 were	 wars	 fought	 in	 other
people’s	 countries.	 The	 men	 and	 women	 who	 were	 killed,	 raped	 and	 looted,
were	 like	 us,	 the	 poor	 and	 the	 hungry	 of	 other	 countries,	 another	 race	 and
another	skin	colour.	But	the	battle	was	now	coming	home.	Fear	hung	in	the	air
like	a	nasty	winter	mist	that	never	goes	away.
We	 had	 a	 fool	 for	 a	 king.	 Otherwise	 how	 could	 one	 explain	 such
stupidity?	 Ask	 any	 common	 man	 on	 the	 road	 and	 he	 would	 say	 what	 a
hypocrite	and	how	evil	Prince	Vibhishana	was.	Only	a	gullible	and	naïve	king
like	 Ravana	 would	 have	 trusted	 such	 a	 mission	 to	 Vibhishana	 and	 Varuna.	 A
few	 days	 ago,	 the	 public	 had	 sent	 off	 Prince	 Vibhishana	 after	 a	 grand	 public
function.	 Thousands	 assembled	 on	 the	 beach	 with	 Asura	 flags.	 Forty-two
warships	carrying	the	entire	royal	navy	and	almost	three	fourths	of	the	Asura
army,	 set	 sail	 towards	 the	 mainland	 to	 capture	 Rama	 and	 crush	 his	 monkeys.
Everyone	knew	that	talk	of	peace	was	only	a	ruse.	We	waited	for	the	ships	to
come	back	in	a	fortnight	with	the	barbarian	Deva	prince,	Rama,	in	chains.
But,	even	after	a	passage	of	twenty	days,	there	was	still	no	news	about	the
Asura	 navy	 and	 army.	 Rumours	 flew	 fast	 and	 quick.	 The	 monkey-men	 had
routed	 the	 Asura	 forces	 near	 the	 Shiva	 temple	 on	 the	 shore	 near
Mahabalipuram.	The	sceptics	like	me,	however,	were	sure	that	Vibhishana	had

switched	 sides.	And	 then	 the	royal	announcement	came.	We	were	right.	From
every	 junction	 and	 corner	 of	 the	 island,	 it	 was	 announced	 that	 Prince
Vibhishana	 and	 Admiral	 Varuna	 had	 switched	 sides.	 The	 Emperor ’s	 brother
had	the	audacity	to	send	a	message	requesting	Ravana	to	relinquish	the	throne
in	 his	 favour	 and	 to	 hand	 over	 Sita	 to	 Rama.	 Varuna	 also	 wrote	 to	 say	 that
Ravana	 was	 no	 longer	 the	 suzerain	 of	 the	 Asuras	 as	 Rama	 had	 declared
Vibhishana,	King	of	Lanka	and	the	Asuras,	in	a	ceremony	at	Mahabalipuram.
There	 was	 also	 a	 joint	 letter	 signed	 by	 the	 two	 villains	 that	 a	 majority	 of	 the
Asura	army	and	the	whole	of	the	Asura	navy,	had	switched	their	loyalties	to	the
Devas.
Ravana	did	not	have	a	chance.	To	save	Lanka	from	a	second	destruction
and	unnecessary	bloodshed,	Ravana	had	to	hand	over	the	throne	peacefully	to
Vibhishana	and	retire	to	the	Himalayas	with	his	family,	if	he	valued	his	life.	But
Ravana	urged	every	citizen	to	rise,	defend	his	motherland	and	culture	from	the
barbarian	Devas	and	the	treacherous	Asuras	who	want	to	impose	Brahmanism
and	 caste	 hierarchy.	Not	that	every	citizen	 of	 Lanka	or	 on	the	 mainland	 led	a
prosperous	life	and	enjoyed	a	life	of	equality,	without	any	hierarchy	or	caste
discrimination.	 Though	 we	 had	 seethed	 under	 the	 slow	 spread	 of	 caste	 and
colour	discrimination	and	had	rued	Ravana’s	rule,	in	our	hearts	we	knew	that
the	king	had	not	been	directly	responsible	for	the	rot	in	Asura	society.	In	fact,
he	and	Prahastha	had	checked	the	spread	of	casteism	seeping	in	from	the	north,
though	Vibhishana	and	his	Brahmin	followers	had	slyly	tried	to	introduce	the
discriminatory	religion	through	the	back	door.	Now,	the	same	Vibhishana	had
allied	 with	 the	 Deva	 King	 and	 had	 threatened	 to	 overthrow	 Ravana.	 People
shuddered	 to	 think	 how	 life	 would	 be	 if	 Vibhishana	 and	 the	 Brahmins	 were
given	ultimate	authoritna	hay.	We	were	afraid.
Preparations	 for	 the	 final	 battle	 between	 the	 Devas	 and	 the	 Asuras	 had
begun	–	it	would	be	the	final	clash	of	two	civilizations.	In	this	decisive	battle,
the	 Asuras	 were	 going	 to	 fight	 with	 one	 arm	 tied	 behind	 our	 backs.	 For	 the
common	man,	our	only	interest	in	joining	Ravana’s	earlier	raiding	parties	as
mercenaries	 was	 only	 for	 sharing	 the	 loot.	 After	 a	 long	 time,	 an	 established
Asura	empire	would	face	an	attack	similar	to	that	faced	by	the	ten	kings	when
Indra	 invaded	 India.	 A	 way	 of	 life,	 a	 culture	 of	 equality	 and	 freedom,	 a
tradition	that	valued	material	pleasure	and	celebrated	life,	braced	itself	to	face
the	 final	 assault	 from	 another	 culture.	 It	 had	 long	 ceased	 to	 be	 a	 personal
matter	between	Ravana	and	Rama.	People	had	hated	Ravana	initially	for	what
they	 saw	 as	 his	 lust	 for	 Sita	 and	 the	 misfortune	 it	 brought	 to	 the	 Asuras.	 But

when	the	 people	heard	the	rumours	that	Sita	was	 an	Asura	princess,	our	own
King’s	 daughter,	 they	 recoiled	 at	 the	 thought	 of	 leaving	 the	 princess	 in	 the
hands	of	Rama.	But	the	king	could	not	drag	us	to	a	war	over	his	private	affairs.
It	was	a	family	feud	at	best	but	we	were	paying	the	price.	Nor	could	I	forgive
him	 for	 the	 way	 he	 had	 treated	 my	 adopted	 son,	 Athikaya,	 who	 was	 also	 his
blood.	But	unlike	Sita,	the	womb	that	had	borne	Athikaya,	was	that	of	a	black
housecleaner	and	not	the	aristocratic	daughter	of	a	great	scientist.	The	Asuras
braced	for	the	final	war	between	good	and	evil.
Rudraka	 paraded	 the	 infantry	 and	 cavalry	 through	 the	 streets.	 People
moved	tensely.	Soldiers	and	police	officers	were	all	on	edge	and	screamed	at
or	 beat	 people	 without	 reason.	 Then	 the	 people	 outside	 the	 fort,	 and	 the
fishermen	who	lived	near	the	bay,	arrived	with	their	fowls	and	beasts.	People
began	to	live	on	footpaths.	Then	the	Asuras	who	lived	near	the	port,	brought
the	 news	 –	 the	 monkey-men	 were	 building	 a	 bridge	 across	 the	 water.	 It	 was
strange,	 fascinating	 and	 fearsome.	 But	 the	 bridge	 inched	 towards	 our	 little
island	 relentlessly.	 As	 it	 grew,	 so	 did	 its	 terror	 effect.	 People	 climbed	 onto
temple	towers	and	treetops	or	any	elevated	place,	and	talked	in	excited	tones.
Kalaripayattu,	 the	 traditional	 Asura	 martial	 arts	 centres,	 came	 up
overnight.	 The	 streets	 were	 filled	 with	 Asuras,	 young	 and	 old,	 men	 and
women,	 carrying	 swords,	 bows	 and	 arrows,	 spears,	 and	 assorted	 weapons.
Ravana	exhorted	his	subjects	to	take	up	arms	and	fight	the	invaders.	Temples
that	 had	 been	 earlier	 closed	 to	 us	 ordinary	 Asuras,	 were	 opened	 and	 became
virtual	army	camps.	The	separation	and	segregation	that	the	Brahmanised	elite
of	the	empire	had	imposed	on	society,	vanished	overnight,	as	most	of	them	left
Lanka	to	join	Rama’s	ranks.	The	old	sense	of	equality	among	the	Asuras	came
back.	 We	 were	 fighting	 for	 our	 culture,	 our	 race,	 our	 way	 of	 life,	 and	 our
traditions.	 This	 was	the	last	battle	which	would	determine	if	 the	 poor	 and	 the
downtrodden	of	India,	stood	a	chance	to	achieve	equality;	it	was	a	war	against
heartless	Casteism	and	Untouchability;	against	degraded	Brahmanism.	I	smiled
at	the	irony.	A	war	against	Brahmanism	was	going	to	be	fought	under	a	king
who	was	secretly	proud	of	his	Brahmin	lineage.	However,	what	choice	did	we
poor,	unlucky,	black	ones	have?	Of	all	the	leaders	and	kings	that	we,	the	blacks
of	this	country,	had	ever	had,	Ravana	was	the	best.	He	was	humane	despite	his
faults	and	the	alternative	–	the	kingdom	of	Rama,	or	worse,	that	of	Vibhishana,
was	too	frightening	even	to	imagine.
Instinctively,	 every	 common	 Asura	 knew	 that	 this	 war	 would	 determine

the	 future	 of	 India	 and	 its	 millions	 of	 poor	 and	 black	 people.	 If	 this	 war	 was
lost	and	Rama	won,	then	we	would	be	kicked	into	the	ditch	forever.	We	knew
that	a	life	worse	than	that	of	a	street	dog	awaited	us	then.	We	would	fight	for
Ravana.	We	would	give	our	blood,	our	lives,	and	everything	we	owned,	for	if
we	 lost	 this	 war,	 we	 would	 lose	 something	 more	 pwers	 recious	 than	 life.	 A
bleak	 and	 dark	 future	 awaited	 our	 children.	 We	 were	 terrified,	 hungry	 and
thirsty,	 yet	 we	 eagerly	 awaited	 to	 fight	 Rama	 and	 his	 monkey-men.	 Our
chances	 were	 grim.	 We	 knew	 it	 well.	 But	 we	 were	 determined	 to	 fight	 to	 the
end.	This	was	the	decisive	war	–	the	war	between	good	and	evil.	We	were	sure
that	Mahadev	Shiva	would	not	allow	evil	to	triumph.
However,	 in	 the	 deepest	 corner	 of	 my	 mind,	 I	 knew	 we	 were	 the	 lesser
children	 of	 the	 Gods,	 and	 even	 a	 compassionate	 and	 all-powerful	 God	 like
Shiva,	 would	 look	 at	 the	 colour	 of	 our	 skin	 and	 flinch.	 Perhaps	 we	 had	 been
born	with	the	wrong	skin	colour.

46	For	my	people
Ravana
The	 palace	 was	 dark.	 Odd	 sounds	 filtered	 through	 the	 humid	 air.	 Not	 a
leaf	stirred.	I	had	been	sitting	on	this	verandah	overlooking	the	sea.	Defeat	and
death	stared	me	in	the	face.	I	berated	myself	for	not	having	thrown	Varuna	into
the	 raging	 waves	 that	 night,	 long,	 long	 ago.	 I	 felt	 numb.	 The	 life	 I	 had	 built
with	 tears,	 toil	 and	 death,	 was	 crumbling.	 The	 torches	 and	 lamps	 the	 palace
servants	had	lit	hours	before,	had	flickered	to	a	slow	death.	Here	and	there	in
the	palace	gardens,	an	odd	lamp	still	shone,	fighting	a	final	battle	to	survive.
For	 hours	 my	 mind	 had	 been	 a	 blank	 page.	 Then,	 like	 a	 headache	 that
starts	with	a	small	flash	of	pain	at	the	temples,	the	feelings	returned:	I	wanted
to	 see	 my	 daughter.	 I	tried	 to	 dismiss	the	thought	and	it	subsided	for	a	while.
But	 before	 long,	 it	 seized	 me	 again.	 I	 stood	 up	 and	 walked	 towards	 the	 giant
Ashoka	 tree	 where	 my	 daughter	 lived.	 It	 was	 dark.	 The	 lights	 that	 escaped
through	the	palace	windows	threw	huge	shadows	on	the	bushes,	making	them
appear	grotesque.	As	I	approached	the	tree,	a	bird	flew	away	with	a	loud	flap	of
wings	 and	 rodents	 scurried	 past.	 A	 bat	 flew	 perilously	 close	 to	 my	 head,
changed	course,	and	then	vanished	into	the	darkness.
She	 slept.	 The	 two	 dozing	 Asura	 woman	 soldiers	 did	 not	 even	 know	 of
my	 presence.	 ‘So	 much	 for	 her	 protection’,	 I	 thought.	 I	 hated	 myself	 for	 the
trembling	 in	 my	 hands.	 I	 wanted	 to	 touch	 her	 and	 go	 back	 to	 her	 childhood,
which	I	had	not	seen.	I	wanted	to	feel	my	baby	daughter ’s	tiny	fingers,	to	cradle
her,	and	see	her	growing	up.	The	moon	broke	through	the	dark	clouds	and	a
reluctant	 beam	 filtered	 through	 the	 leaves	 of	 the	 Ashoka	 and	 illuminated	 her
angelic	face.	The	dull	moonlight	played	hide	and	seek	with	the	dark	shadows
of	the	garden.	A	gentle	breeze	rustled	the	leaves.	She	stirred.	A	small	drop	of
tear	 flowed	 from	 the	 edge	 of	 her	 eyes	 over	 the	 bridge	 of	 her	 lovely	 nose,

balanced	 on	 the	 tip	 and	 fell	 down.	 My	 heart	 went	 out	 for	 my	 little	 precious
daughter.	She	was	pining	for	her	husband’s	love.	Did	I	do	a	mistake	in	taking
her	away	from	the	person	whom	she	loved?	Suddenly	I	was	angry.	Why	can’t
she	see	her	father ’s	love?	What	was	there	in	Rama	that	could	make	her	forget
all	the	wealth	I	had	earned?	Then	my	anger	oozed	away	and	in	its	place	a	sense
of	helplessness	arose.	I	had	wronged	her.	I	had	forsaken	her	when	she	wanted
me	most.	I	was	busy	building	an	empire.	In	my	insane	race	for	success,	I	lost
my	 daughter ’s	 childhood.	 Now,	 when	 she	 was	 so	 madly	 in	 love	 with	 her
husband,	I	had	again	taken	her	away	from	him.	I	hated	myself	for	doing	so.	But
why	 can’t	 she	 understand?	 Her	 husband	 would	 never	 take	 her	 back.	 He	 was
standing	 at	 my	 city	 gates,	 roaring	 death	 and	 destruction	 to	 an	 old	 man,	 not
because	he	loved	his	wife	so	dearly.	Or	did	he?	I	don’t	want	to	lose	my	child
again.	I	do	not	want	him	to	take	her	away	from	me.	She	is	an	Asura	princess
and	she	is	my	daughter.	I	had	lost	her	once,	I	will	not	let	it	happen	again.
Instinctively	she	awoke	and	saw	me	standing	there	with	a	look	of	despair
and	confusion	on	my	face.	I	wanted	to	persuade	her	to	stay	with	us,	her	parents.
But	 as	 I	 moved	 towards	 her,	 she	 screamed.	 The	 spell	 was	 broken	 and	 I
staggered	 back,	 disgusted	 with	 myself.	 She	 spoke	 words	 of	 abuse,	 sobbing
hysterically	and	calling	on	Rama	to	save	her.	The	Asura	women	guards	woke
with	 a	start,	looking	confused.	 But	before	they	could	see	me,	 I	withdrew	 into
the	shadows	and	hurried	back	to	my	palace.	My	heart	cried	in	pain	as	I	entered
my	bedroom	and	saw	Mandodari	sitting	on	the	bed.	I	could	not	face	her.
“Where	were	you?”	Was	there	an	edge	to	her	voice?	I	shrugged	and	lay
down	with	my	back	towards	her.	I	felt	bitter	and	angry	about	everything.	‘Why
did	 she	 come	 into	 my	 life’	 I	 shifted	 in	 my	 bed	 but	 the	 thoughts	 refused	 to	 go
away.	 Then	 I	 felt	 a	 warm	 hand	 on	 my	 shoulder	 and	 turned	 to	 hug	 my	 wife.
Slowly,	I	began	to	undress	her.	I	could	not	remember	the	last	time	I	had	loved
her	and	waited	for	the	rush	of	desire	to	overwhelm	me.	But	nothing	happened.	I
fumbled	with	her	clothes,	like	a	teenager	minus	passion.	I	felt	her	go	rigid	and
stiff.	Once	again	I	attempted	to	stoke	those	forgotten	passions	and	then	gave	up.
I	turned	away	from	her	and	lay	on	my	back.	She	put	her	head	on	my	shoulder
and	 tried	 to	 stroke	 passion	 with	 her	 hands.	 But	 nothing	 happened.	 I	 was	 tired
and	wished	she	would	give	up	and	leave	me	in	peace.	I	hated	her	at	that	moment
and	I	hated	myself	for	being	impotent.	I	do	not	know	for	how	many	hours	we
lay	like	that,	but	slowly	sleep	claimed	her	and	she	slid	back	to	her	side	of	the
bed.	But	the	simple	mercy	of	peaceful	sleep	eluded	me.	Millions	of	thoughts,
mostly	meaningless,	popped	up.	Somewhere	between,	a	sense	of	weariness	and

defeat	 crept	 in.	 I	 wanted	 to	 end	 it	 all.	 Life	 had	 no	 meaning.	 Everything	 was
worthless.	I	tossed	from	side	to	side	and	the	slipped	into	a	stupor.
Then,	when	the	eastern	sky	had	turned	pale,	I	woke	with	a	start,	drenched
in	sweat.	I	have	been	learning	astrology	and	astronomy	from	Mayan.	As	I	grew
older,	 my	 own	 vulnerability	 had	 gradually	 made	 me	 more	 receptive	 to	 these
abstract	sciences.	Any	subject	that	interested	me,	I	devoted	long	hours	of	study
to.	 Life	 was	 so	short	and	 there	was	so	much	to	learn.	I	was	in	the	process	of
writing	a	book,	a	samhita,	on	astrology	and	omens.	Maybe	that	prompted	the
nightmare	I	had	of	my	daughter	Sita	being	dragged	away	by	tall	and	fair	men
and	 being	 thrown	 into	 a	 raging	 fire.	 Rama	 sat	 on	 a	 high	 pedestal,	 visibly
distressed.	Somewhere	nearby,	another	fire	was	raging.	More	than	the	horrible
fate	of	my	daughter,	it	was	the	grotesque	face	that	was	hungrily	being	devoured
by	the	flames	that	woke	me,	my	heart	thudding	in	my	chest.	It	was	the	face	of
the	 Asura	 Emperor.	 Was	 it	 an	 omen,	 the	 harbinger	 of	 things	 to	 come?
Astrology	was	such	a	veiled	science	and	I	did	not	believe	in	omens.	I	wished
sleep	 would	 claim	 me	 back	 into	 her	 bosom,	 but	 disturbing	 images	 kept	 me
awake	 and	 tired.	 Twice,	 my	 servants	 came	 to	 wake	 me,	 but	 I	 ignored	 them,
feeling	their	dread	through	the	covered	sheet	under	which	I	nestled	under	like	a
frightened	child.	Finally,	Mandodari	came	and	shook	me	awake.	It	was	a	bleak
morning.	The	sky	was	overcast	and	darkness	loomed	over	the	heaving	ocean.
“Your	Highness,	the	Council	awaits.”	Prahastha’s	voice	startled	me	and	I
looked	at	him	with	bleary	eyes.	Council.	.	.what	Council.	.	.	What	do	they	want
to	discuss	now?’	I	was	weary	of	everything	–	petty	politics	and	egos;	bickering
and	 tussles;	 endless	 meetings	 and	 sycophants	 trying	 to	 impress	 me	 with	 their
unfailing	 patriotism;	 my	 glittering	 palace;	 my	 verything	 empire;	 the	 war	 I
would	 have	 to	 inevitably	 wage	 against	 Rama.	 I	 was	 tired	 of	 life.	 I	 wanted
Prahastha	 and	 his	 kind	 to	 go	 away	 and	 vanish	 from	 my	 world.	 ‘Why	 did	 I
choose	to	be	King?’	I	should	have	chosen	a	simpler	life	on	the	beautiful	shores
of	 the	 Poorna	 river,	 dreamt	 small	 dreams,	 and	 lived	 and	 died	 like	 the
insignificant	 millions	 of	 the	 world.	 A	 small	 hut,	 a	 faithful	 wife,	 beautiful
children,	some	fields	to	till	and	all	the	time	in	the	world	to	enjoy	life	–	but	I
knew	such	dreams	were	just	that	–	dreams.
I	sat	there	for	a	long	time	after	Prahastha	had	left.	I	did	not	feel	like	doing
my	puja	to	Shiva.	‘Let	him	do	without	a	puja	today.’	I	had	prayed	enough,	even
without	 being	sure	whether	God	heard	me	or	not.	 When	I	finally	reached	 the
durbar,	 the	 Council	 members	 were	 huddled	 in	 circles,	 chatting	 irreverently
like	school	kids.	There	was	a	sudden	hush	when	I	entered	and	they	scrambled

to	 their	 respective	 seats.	 I	 waited	 with	 growing	 annoyance	 as	 many	 fumbled
with	their	dress	and	their	turbans.
Prahastha	stood	up	but	I	cut	him	off	with	a	flick	of	my	hand.	I	could	see
the	 embarrassment	 and	 hurt	 on	 his	 face	 but	 I	 cared	 nothing	 about	 his	 fragile
feelings.	Once	more	I	waited	for	the	murmurs	to	die	down	and	then	said,	“The
enemy	 is	 breathing	 down	 our	 necks.	 We	 are	 facing	 betrayal	 after	 betrayal.
Vibhishana,	the	brother	I	cradled	in	my	arms	and	considered	a	son,	left	for	the
enemy	 camps.	 Varuna,	 the	 snake,	 whom	 I	 trusted	 with	 our	 navy,	 and	 whom	 I
considered	 my	 best	 friend,	 has	 become	 a	 slave	 of	 that	 Deva	 upstart.	 Half	 our
army	and	the	entire	navy	have	switched	sides.	So	much	for	the	Asura	empire
and	 the	 glory	 of	 our	 race,	 for	 which	 I	 have	 given	 my	 blood,	 my	 kin,	 my
dreams,	my	life.”
“We	should	move	to	the	Subela	hills.	The	fort	there	will	hold	against	any
enemy	attack.	We	have	enough	provisions	there	to	last	for	several	months.	We
will	wait	there	and	wear	the	enemy	out.”	Prahastha	interfered.
I	 took	 some	 time	 to	 register	 what	 Prahastha	 was	 saying	 and	 then	 felt
suddenly	angry.	”No,	I	will	not	run	away	from	two	Deva	men	and	their	rag-tag
army	of	monkey-men.	I	am	the	Emperor	of	the	Asuras,	and	I	will	not	hide	in
the	hills.	I	will	crush	them.”
There	 was	 visible	 commotion	 among	 my	 ministers.	 Then	 Jambumali
stood	 up	 painfully	 and	 said,	 ”Your	 Highness!	 If	 we	 can	 hold	 out	 in	 the	 hills
until	the	next	monsoon,	then	we	can	trap	Rama’s	army	between	the	raging	sea
and	the	city.	We	can	resort	to	guerilla	tactics	and	weaken	the	enemy	until	then.”
“You	want	me	to	leave	the	city	to	the	mercy	of	those	barbarians?	I	think
you	fools	have	forgotten	the	lessons	of	history.	How	many	magnificent	Asura
cities	were	ransacked	and	burnt	to	ashes;	how	many	women	raped	and	ravaged
by	the	Devas	in	the	past?	You	think	the	sons	of	Indra	will	spare	our	magnificent
city?”
“But,	Your	Highness!	We	are	weak	now.	We	have	to	strategize,	plan	and
fight	the	war	on	our	terms.	The	Subela	hills	are	practically	impenetrable.	The
retreating	monsoon	will	start	any	time	now	and	the	steep	walls	of	Subela	Fort
will	form	a	formidable	barrier	for	even	the	monkey-men.	Moreover,	we	will
be	 out	of	range	of	the	 flame	throwers	of	Varuna’s	ships.”	 Prahastha	patiently
waited	for	my	reply.
I	could	sense	the	tension	in	the	room	but	did	not	say	anything.	My	Prime
Minister	was	right.	In	the	Subela	hills,	we	would	be	able	to	keep	Rama	at	bay
forever.	We	could	then	bribe	Varuna’s	men	to	come	over	to	our	side	and	strike

at	 Rama	 later	 in	 summer.	 I	 knew	 my	 Governor	 Khara,	 who	 was	 now	 at	 the
northern-most	border	of	my	kingdom,	in	the	middle	of	India,	was	m	meoving
rapidly	to	encircle	Rama	from	the	rear.	Once	Rama	was	weak,	I	was	sure	that
Varuna	would	switch	loyalties	again.	But	he	would	take	a	few	months	to	cover
the	 distance	 with	 his	 huge	 army.	 Could	 we	 hold	 on	 till	 then?	 Even	 if	 we	 did
hold	on,	what	would	happen	to	my	city	and	my	people?	What	if	Prahastha	was
plotting	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 me?	 No,	 Ravana	 would	 not	 run	 away	 like	 a	 coward.
Strategy	or	not,	I	would	stay	here	and	protect	my	people.
Suddenly	we	heard	a	rising	uproar	from	the	streets.	It	was	faint	initially,
but	 slowly	 rose	 into	 a	 crescendo.	 The	 Council	 members	 apprehensively	 rose
from	 their	 seats	 and	 I	 could	 not	 contain	 my	 curiosity.	 Was	 it	 Rama’s	 army
attacking?	 I	 rushed	 to	 the	 open	 verandah	 where	 I	 usually	 gave	 my	 morning
darshan	 to	 my	 subjects	 and	 heard	 their	 complaints.	 A	 serpentine	 procession
was	marching	towards	the	palace.	As	far	as	the	eye	could	see,	people,	men	and
women,	old	and	young,	were	marching	towards	the	palace.	The	guards	at	the
fort	gates	tried	to	restrain	them,	but	the	crowd	pushing	past	relentlessly.
“Death	to	the	Devas!”	“Har	Har	Mahadeva!”	“Ravana	Vijaya!”	The	angry
cries	 tore	 at	 the	 sky	 as	 the	 crowd	 brandished	 all	 sorts	 of	 weapons,	 from	 10foot	 spears	 and	 swords,	 to	 garden	 tools	 and	 even	 kitchen	 knives.	 Drummers
frantically	beat	the	timeless	Asura	rhythms	on	Chendas.
‘How	could	I	even	 think	of	 leaving	my	people	and	hiding	in	the	 hills?’	I
waved	 my	 hands	 and	 the	 crowd	 roared	 back	 in	 approval.	 I	 gestured	 to	 the
guards	to	let	the	crowd	in.	‘Who	was	I	to	restrain	them?’	The	crowds	rushed	in.
They	trampled	the	manicured	gardens,	upset	the	flower	pots	and	some	urchins
jumped	 into	 the	 fountains.	 The	 palace	 opened	 its	 gates	 to	 my	 subjects.	 It	 felt
good.	I	raised	my	hands	to	the	sky	and	a	sudden	hush	fell	on	the	crowd.	In	that
moment,	 I	 felt	 like	 God.	 I	 felt	 the	 charisma	 I	 had	 lost	 somewhere	 in	 the
labyrinths	of	power,	return	to	me.	I	felt	that	I	had	once	again	reconnected	with
my	people.	I	regained	my	youth.
“Long	 ago,	 when	 I	 was	 barely	 seventeen,	 I	 made	 a	 promise	 to	 you.	 I
promised	you	a	world	where	all	men	and	women	would	be	treated	as	equals.	I
promised	 to	 give	 you	 back	 the	 golden	 age	 of	 Mahabali.	 We	 hoped	 to	 regain
our	 glory.	 We	 had	 nothing	 except	 hope.	 You	 reposed	 your	 confidence	 in	 my
leadership	 and	 I,	 in	 your	 loyalty.	 Together,	 we	 challenged	 the	 mighty	 Deva
empire.	 With	 a	 handful	 of	 men,	 we	 started	 a	 campaign	 against	 inequality,
Brahmanism,	oppression,	and	meaningless	rituals.	With	your	sweat	and	blood,
we	built	what	we	see	around	us	today.	From	this	pearl	island	to	the	foothills	of

the	Vindhyas,	we	made	the	Asura	flag	fly	high.
Prosperity	came	to	our	people.	We	built	magnificent	cities	and	made	leaps
of	progress	in	science,	art	and	culture.	Our	great	temples	proclaimed	the	glory
of	 Shiva.	 The	 granaries	 overflowed	 with	 the	 fruits	 of	 Asura	 labour.	 We	 built
temples	of	knowledge	and	ensured	each	Asura	was	literate.	Our	hospitals	took
care	of	the	sick	and	we	built	roads	and	canals.	We	can	now	confidently	claim	to
be	 the	 richest	 empire	 in	 the	 world.”	 I	 paused	 for	 effect.	 Cries	 of	 ‘Har	 Har
Mahadev’	and	‘Ravana	vijaya’	rose	on	all	sides.
“However,	on	the	march	towards	progress,	we	made	some	mistakes.	We
strayed	 from	 the	 path	 of	 righteousness	 that	 our	 great	 leaders	 of	 yore	 had	 so
painfully	walked	upo="-n.	We	lost	purity	of	thought	and	the	simplicity	of	life.
Like	 the	 Devas,	 we	 began	 to	 think	 that	 some	 men	 were	 privileged.	 It	 would
perhaps	 been	 justified	 if	 privilege	 was	 based	 on	 abilities	 and	 merit.	 But	 the
Deva	civilization,	if	one	could	call	it	that,	though	defeated	by	the	mighty	power
of	Asura-arms,	slowly	seeped	in	and	poisoned	our	minds.	Like	them,	we	began
to	consider	some	human	beings	as	divine;	that	some	were	pure	and	others	not	–
not	because	of	their	deeds	or	their	minds,	but	because	of	their	birth.	As	your
leader,	 I	 should	 have	 seen	 the	 evil	 thoughts	 of	 caste	 seeping	 into	 our	 society.
Alas,	I	was	busy	glorifying	myself.”	The	crowd	groaned.
“I	 forgot	 our	 values	 myself,	 so	 why	 should	 I	 blame	 society?	 The
Brahmins,	 and	 I	 mean	 no	 evil	 to	 them	 as	 individuals,	 cornered	 all	 that	 was
worthwhile,	and	the	majority	of	you	were	left	in	the	dumps.	I,	as	your	leader,
failed	 you,	 for	 I	 allowed	 my	 brother,	 the	 traitor	 Vibhishana,	 to	 flirt	 with
Brahmanism	 and	 Vishnu.	 I	 am	 ashamed	 to	 say	 I	 prided	 myself	 that	 I	 was
superior	to	you	because	I	am	half-Brahmin	myself.	I	was	secretly	proud	of	my
fair	complexion	and	considered	black	skin	dirty	and	evil.”
The	crowd	stood	rapt	in	attention	as	the	words	came	of	their	own	volition.
“Today,	 our	 civilization	 is	 at	 crossroads.	 I	 stand	 before	 you,	 not	 as	 an
Emperor,	not	as	the	arrogant	all-conquering	Rakshasa	that	my	detractors	like
to	call	me,	but	as	a	simple	man,	as	a	fellow	Asura,	with	my	heart	bared.	I	have
sinned,	for	I	am	not	God,	but	a	human	being	like	you.	I	stand	chastised	for	the
wrongs	I	have	committed.	I	stand	humbled	by	the	simple	trust	you	have	placed
in	 my	 leadership.	 I	 pray	 to	 Shiva	 that	 he	 gives	 me	 strength	 to	 shoulder	 this
heavy	burden.
This	war,	despite	what	many	people	think,	is	not	about	Sita,	the	beautiful
wife	 of	 the	 Deva	 Prince	 Rama,	 and	 the	 lecherous	 lust	 of	 your	 old	 King	 for
another	man’s	wife.	Nor	is	this	war	about	avenging	the	humiliation	suffered	by

my	sister	Soorpanakha,	at	the	hands	of	Lakshmana,	the	brother	of	Rama.	This.	.
.”	I	paused.	Suddenly	the	words	had	dried	up.	The	crowd	waited	in	anticipation.
“My	dear	Asura	friends.	.	.Sita.	.	.Is	my	daughter.”	There	was	a	huge	roar
from	 the	 crowd	 and	 I	 waited	 for	 it	 die	 down.	 The	 mid-noon	 sun	 beat	 down
mercilessly,	 sucking	 my	 energy	 and	 dulling	 my	 brain.	 Rivers	 of	 perspiration
ran	 down	 my	 face.	 Thousands	 of	 black,	 wet	 faces	 gleamed	 below.	 Angry,
confused	and	excited,	the	crowd	swayed.	I	did	not	want	to	look	back	and	face
my	 ministers,	 though	 I	 suspected	 they	 knew	 about	 Sita.	 I	 did	 not	 have	 the
courage	to	face	them	now.	A	few	minutes	ago	I	had	planned	to	sway	the	crowd
with	my	speech	about	the	future	of	the	Asura	civilization,	now,	those	words	had
gone	into	hiding.	I	supported	myself	on	the	balustrade	and	waited.	I	knew	the
crowd	could	turn	dangerous	at	this	time.	I	felt	exhausted	and	tired.
‘Victory	to	Sita	Mata!	Victory	to	Princess	of	Asuras!’	a	forlorn	cry	went
up	 from	 one	 corner.	 There	 was	 a	 deadly	 silence.	 Heads	 turned	 in	 surprise
towards	the	sound.	I	squinted	into	the	sun	to	see	who	had	uttered	the	cry.	Was	it
Bhadra,	the	old	rascal?	I	could	see	a	shriveled,	old	man,	leaning	on	a	staff,	with
a	sprightly,	black,	muscular	youth	near	him,	but	I	was	not	sure	about	the	face.
Once	 more	 the	 old	 man	 cried	 out,	 ‘Victory	 to	 mother	 Sita!’	 And	 as	 one,	 the
crowd	erupted	with	cries	of	victory	for	Sita	and	Ravana.	The	Chendas	that	had
become	 silent,	 exploded	 into	 wild	 Asura	 rhythms	 and	 the	 crowd,	 swayed	 and
pulsated	like	a	monster	snake	as	it	crawled	out	of	my	palace,	raising	a	hill	of
dust	in	its	wake.
As	 the	 war	 cry	 faded,	 I	 turned	 to	 my	 ministers	 and	 said,	 nisterssai	 and
thSo	it	is	settled.	We	will	stay	put	and	fight.”	All	except	Prahastha	bowed.	As	I
left	for	my	chambers	with	a	flourish,	I	could	see	Prahastha	had	a	glassy	look	in
his	 eyes.	 I	 caught	 his	 eye	 and	 he	 imperceptibly	 shook	 his	 head.	 Later,	 in	 the
dark,	cool	chambers,	long	after	the	fire	lit	in	my	body	by	my	subjects	had	died
down,	 I	 found	 myself	 praying	 to	 Shiva	 to	 soothe	 the	 rising	 panic.	 A
premonition	of	doom	hung	in	the	thick,	humid	air	over	Lanka.	I	could	smell	it;
I	 could	 feel	 it	 in	 my	 hair.	 Perhaps	 Prahastha	 was	 right	 as	 usual.	 However,	 I
would	 rather	 have	 died	 and	 lost	 everything	 than	 abandoned	 my	 people	 to	 the
horrendous	monkey	army	of	Rama.	I	knew	it	was	logical	to	withdraw	now,	but
I	was	too	proud	and	too	sentimental.	I	would	stay	here	and	fight	with	my	half
army.	I	owed	my	people	that	much	at	least.
In	those	lonely	hours,	as	I	wriggled	and	fumbled	with	the	logic	of	head

and	heart,	the	fate	of	India,	the	Asura	empire,	and	millions	of	black	people,	was
decided	 forever.	 Had	 I	 listened	 to	 my	 head,	 perhaps	 fate	 would	 have	 decreed
differently.	But	then,	I	was	always	a	creature	of	passion.	I	had	lived	as	Ravana
and	I	would	die	as	Ravana.	I	did	not	intend	to	become	Rama,	the	perfect	man
and	God.	There	was	no	dearth	of	gods	in	my	country.	It	only	lacked	men.

47	War	without	ethics
Bhadra
I	 shouted	 with	 all	 my	 might	 for	 the	 Asura	 princess.	 I	 was	 happy	 that	 at
least	one	ruler	had	been	honest	enough	to	admit	the	truth.	The	crowd’s	mood
changed	 after	 that.	 Who	 knows?	 I	 might	 have	 saved	 the	 day	 for	 Ravana.	 I
followed	the	crowd	back	but	was	too	tired	to	walk	back	to	my	hut.	So	I	slept	in
front	 of	 a	 silk	 shop,	 on	 the	 footpath.	 Many	 more	 slept	 on	 the	 footpaths.
Policing	had	become	lax	once	the	war	fever	had	caught	on.
Suddenly,	in	the	dead	of	night,	flame-tipped	arrows	were	shot	towards	the
marketplace.	 The	 war	 had	 started	 with	 a	 bang.	 The	 marketplace	 was	 on	 fire.
Varuna’s	 flamethrowers	 had	 shot	 the	 fiery	 arrows	 from	 the	 ships	 anchored	 a
few	hundred	feet	from	shore.	Arrows	hissed	and	thrummed	in	the	air;	they	hit
things;	pierced	men;	landed	on	hay	roofs	and	gutted	them.	The	inky	black	sky
was	lit	with	thousands	of	tongues	of	red	flame	that	seemed	to	dance	in	macabre
delight	as	death	rained	on	Lanka	like	the	monsoon	rain.	Had	I	not	been	running
for	 dear	 life,	 I	 would	 have	 stopped	 to	 enjoy	 the	 spectacle	 that	 Varuna	 was
providing	for	his	erstwhile	friends.
People	ran	out.	Screams	rang	through	the	sky.	Flesh	burned.	Houses	were
gutted	and	thick,	black	smoke,	swirled	upwards.	It	was	like	being	in	hell.	For
the	 first	 time	 I	 faced	 war	 as	 a	 common	 man	 and	 not	 a	 warrior.	 I	 found	 that	 I
needed	more	courage	to	survive	like	this	than	on	the	battlefield.	There	at	least
we	 knew	 who	 the	 enemy	 was.	 Here,	 death	 came	 in	 various	 forms:	 as	 falling
beams,	as	marauding	troops,	as	thick	black	smoke	that	choked	you,	as	leaping
flames,	as	arrowheads.	Here	we	wait	for	death	to	find	us.
The	 Devas	 had	 no	 sense	 of	 fair	 play.	 They	 were	 firing	 at	 the	 civilians
first.	 Their	 intention	 was	 to	 cause	 panic,	 weaken	 and	 demoralize	 us.	 With
daylight,	they	would	cross	the	bridge	and	launch	the	attack	with	their	infantry

and	cavalry.	‘What	was	our	King	doing?’	For	all	his	big	words,	he	could	have
hidden	himself	in	the	Subela	hill	fort.	You	could	not	trust	these	kings.	Where
had	 Athikaya	 gone?	 A	 dull	 panic	 throbbed	 in	 my	 stomach.	 I	 ran	 against	 the
fleeing	 crowds,	 stumbling,	 getting	 up,	 stamping	 and	 trampling	 on	 a	 tide	 of
frightened	men	and	women	running	like	mice.	‘Where	was	Athikaya?’	I	was	on
the	 verge	 of	 tears.	 I	 pressed	 myself	 against	 a	 lamp	 post	 and	 stood	 there	 pa
palatnting.	 The	 sky	 was	 dark	 with	 black	 fumes.	 The	 smell	 of	 burning	 flesh
made	 me	 retch.	 ‘Where	 has	 the	 Asura	 army	 gone?	 Why	 were	 they	 not	 doing
anything	to	protect	us	from	the	monkey-men?’	A	sense	of	helplessness	and	utter
disgust	for	our	rulers	prevailed	among	the	panicky	crowd.	I	could	sense	their
fear.
As	if	to	answer	my	 questions,	a	cavalry	unit	suddenly	appeared	 through
the	 thick	 smoke.	 Some	 of	 the	 fleeing	 people	 paused	 to	 look	 back,	 but	 the
cavalry	 pressed	 on	 through	 the	 crowd,	 trampling	 some,	 physically	 throwing
out	many,	and	hacking	a	way	through	the	crowd	with	swords	and	whip	lashes.
‘Oh	 God!	 Rama’s	 cavalry,’	 I	 thought,	 but	 then	 caught	 a	 glimpse	 of
Vajradhamstra	in	the	lead.	It	was	the	Asura	cavalry	going	to	meet	the	monkeymen.
People	 lay	 dead	 or	 injured	 on	 the	 road.	 I	 walked	 towards	 the	 palace,
equally	afraid	of	both	Rama’s	and	Ravana’s	arrows.	Charred	carcasses	of	men
and	animals	lay	scattered	around.	After	a	few	hundred	yards,	the	sky	cleared	a
little	 and	 I	 paused	 to	 breathe	 in	 some	 fresh	 air.	 The	 palace	 stood	 in	 deathly
silence.	Varuna’s	flaming	arrows	did	not	have	the	reach	to	touch	the	palace,	so
for	now,	the	King	was	safe,	unlike	his	poor	subjects.	I	looked	towards	the	sea.
Varuna’s	 ships	 were	 rolling	 gently	 on	 the	 waves.	 I	 could	 see	 thousands	 of
armed	 men	 shooting	 flame-tipped	 arrows	 towards	 the	 main	 market	 and
residential	 areas.	 I	 clambered	 up	 a	 small	 hillock,	 a	 few	 yards	 from	 the	 main
street,	which	jutted	towards	the	sea	and	got	a	better	view	from	there.
Rama’s	 bridge	 was	 almost	 complete.	 Men,	 elephants	 and	 horses,	 had
unloaded	from	the	ships	and	a	long,	serpentine,	infantry	column	snaked	its	way
towards	 Lanka.	 I	 could	 see	 the	 fluttering	 Deva	 flags	 with	 the	 emblem	 of
Vishnu’s	 conch,	 and	 feel	 the	 rising	 enthusiasm	 of	 the	 barbarian	 army	 as	 they
saw	the	rich	Asura	capital	for	the	first	time.
I	saw	Vajradhamstra’s	cavalry	clash	with	the	rushing	monkey-men,	on	the
beautiful	white	sands	of	our	beaches.	Till	a	few	days	ago,	lovers	had	strolled
those	white	sands,	hand	in	hand	and	mothers	had	watched	with	delight	the	tiny
steps	their	toddlers	made.	On	the	same	sands,	where	life	had	been	so	beautiful,

now	 death	 danced	 in	 the	 steps	 of	 Kali.	 A	 huge	 boulder	 that	 the	 Asura	 army
catapulted	 from	 a	 nearby	 hill,	 found	 its	 mark.	 Another	 found	 its	 mark,	 then
another,	until	a	ship	swayed,	and	went	down.	A	huge	cheer	rose	from	the	Asura
ranks.
The	 fort	 gate	 opened	 and	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 Asura	 cavalry	 and	 infantry,
thousands	and	thousands	of	armed	men,	with	the	battle	cry	Har	Har	Mahadev!
on	their	lips,	charged	forth.	I	looked	around.	It	was	a	glorious	day.	The	sea	lay
like	 a	 sheet	 of	 glass,	 reflecting	 the	 deep,	 blue	 sky.	 Dragonflies	 buzzed	 and
flowers	 bloomed	 all	 around	 me.	 If	 I	 could	 somehow	 shut	 out	 the	 smell	 of
blood	 and	 death,	 I	 would	 have	 smelt	 the	 freshness	 of	 the	 earth	 and	 the	 dew.
Then,	in	a	surprising	moment	of	clarity,	I	saw	it	all.	The	world	was	indifferent
to	 the	 trivial	 pursuits	 of	 men.	 It	 was	 indifferent	 to	 whether	 Rama	 or	 Ravana
won.	It	was	as	indifferent	to	the	plight	of	the	Asuras	as	it	was	to	the	plight	of	a
deer	in	the	death	grip	of	a	panther.	The	earth	was	wet	with	the	blood	of	men,	of
beasts,	 of	 anything	 that	 breathed.	 Every	 moment,	 someone,	 something,	 was
being	killed	somewhere	–	perhaps	by	the	enemy	on	a	battlefield	or	a	killer	who
had	broken	into	a	house	in	search	of	victims	or	a	hungry	tiger;	by	an	accident
on	 the	 road;	 or	 as	 a	 sacrifice	 to	 quench	 the	 bloodlust	 of	 the	 Gods.	 Violence
alone	 ruled	 the	 world.	 Everything	 else	 was	 a	 brief	 interlude,	 a	 pause	 before
violence	struck	with	more	viciousness.	Strangely,	it	did	not	matter.	All	that	talk
about	honour	and	pride,	of	race	and	skin	colour,	of	morals	and	traditions,	of
triumphs	and	failuriolence	stes,	it	was	irrelevant	in	the	greater	order	of	things.
Yet	 something	 throbbed	 in	 me.	 Fear?	 Hope?	 Thirst	 for	 revenge?
Weariness	and	the	meaninglessness	of	these	thoughts	throbbed	in	my	head.	And
somewhere,	in	this	muddle	of	uncontrolled	emotions,	I	desperately	grasped	for
the	 meaning	 of	 this	 maddening	 phenomenon	 called	 life.	 Later,	 much	 later,	 I
realized	that	the	only	meaning	of	life	was	that	it	did	not	have	any	meaning.	By
then,	however,	it	was	too	late.	Wearily	I	walked	towards	the	palace.	I	heard	the
screams	and	shouts	from	the	beach	where	a	pitched	battle	was	going	on.	Dust
swirled	in	the	sky.	I	stood	on	tiptoe	to	look	for	Athikaya.	‘Where	was	my	son?	I
want	to	find	him	before	he	gets	himself	killed.’	I	wanted	to	go	home	to	my	wife
Mala,	 and	 somehow	 convince	 Athikaya,	 if	 I	 could	 find	 him,	 to	 leave	 this
madness	 and	 escape	 from	 this	 mad	 world	 inhabited	 by	 Ramas	 and	 Ravanas.
‘Where	was	he?	Or	was	he	already	lying	dead	on	the	beach?’	With	leaden	feet,	I
dragged	myself	towards	the	palace.
The	 palace	 lay	 hidden	 behind	 the	 rising	 cloud	 of	 dust.	 The	 gates	 were
closed	and	the	guards	tense	and	alert.	I	stopped,	gasping	for	breath	and	cursed

my	foolish	son	and	the	stupid	men	who	had	started	this	war.	I	prayed	it	to	be
over.	 One	 way	 or	 the	 another.	 I	 would	 have	 liked	 the	 intruder,	 Rama,	 to	 be
captured	 and	 hanged	 –	 not	 that	 I	 loved	 Ravana.	 But	 at	 least,	 his	 rule	 was
tolerable.	But	was	he	a	match	for	the	sly	Deva	prince?	The	sun	baked	my	back.
With	 my	 knotty	 fingers	 over	 my	 eyes,	 to	 shield	 them	 from	 the	 blazing	 sun,	 I
scanned	 the	 palace	 balconies	 to	 catch	 a	 glimpse	 of	 Athikaya.	 The	 palace
seemed	deserted.	Then	slowly,	as	my	eyes	adjusted	from	the	blazing	sunlight	to
the	relatively	dark	palace,	I	saw	the	tall	and	fair	Asura	Emperor,	standing	alone
on	a	balcony.	He	stood	staring	impassively	towards	the	beach.	Here	was	a	man
who	 was	 watching	 the	 glorious	 life	 he	 had	 built	 for	 himself	 and	 his	 people,
collapsing	around	him.	Yet,	his	face	remained	noble	and	impassive,	his	posture
erect	and	proud.	With	his	silvery	mane	flying	in	the	breeze,	he	looked	divine.
In	 spite	 of	 myself,	 I	 bowed.	 He	 turned	 towards	 me	 and	 our	 eyes	 locked.	 He
nodded	and	my	heart	leapt	with	joy.	He	had	remembered	this	poor	servant,	the
poor	wretch,	Bhadra,	who	had	been	at	his	side	when	he	was	the	hurricane	that
blasted	Deva	bastions,	long	ago,	in	our	youth.
I	saw	a	guard	coming	towards	me.	The	Emperor	had	vanished	from	his
balcony.	The	guard	ordered	me	to	enter	the	palace.	As	I	stepped	in	through	the
golden	gates	of	Ravana’s	palace,	and	stood	drinking	in	the	beauty	of	the	place,
I	was	rudely	pushed	aside.	Before	I	could	protest,	a	chariot	rushed	past	me	at
great	 speed.	 My	 curses	 died	 when	 I	 saw	 a	 limp	 figure	 with	 its	 head	 smashed
beyond	recognition.	As	the	chariot	turned,	I	saw	the	face.	It	was	Vajradhamstra.
“The	 monkey-men	 hit	 him	 from	 behind!”	 I	 heard	 one	 of	 the	 soldiers
explaining	in	great	animation	to	his	fascinated	listeners.	This	was	a	sick	war,
with	 no	 morals.	 I	 wanted	 to	 get	 out	 of	 this	 place	 and	 ran	 into	 the	 palace	 in
search	of	Athikaya.

48	Sons	are	sons
Ravana
The	day	ended	triumphantly.	Rudraka,	who	had	been	given	command	of
the	army	after	Vajra’s	death,	and	Sumali	and	Prahastha’s	brilliant	moves	in	the
canoes	 which	cut	off	 Rama’s	 army,	saved	the	day.	Rama’s	monkey-men	were
butchered	 like	 pigs.	 Prahastha	 also	 managed	 to	 recapture	 three	 ships	 of
Varuna’s	fleet.	This	could	tilt	the	balance	greatly	in	our	favour	in	the	days	to
come.
Many	people	paid	homage	to	Vajra’s	lifeless	body,	which	had	been	kept	at
the	palace	gates.	People	who	had	bee	fan	terrified	of	him	in	life,	now	flocked
to	 see	 the	 dead	 Asura	 commander.	 I	 had	 hated	 his	 high-handedness,	 his	 guts,
and	his	devil-may-care	attitude.	The	way	in	which	he	had	quelled	the	Brahmin
rebellion	 had	 been	 ignoble.	 The	 tyranny	 he	 had	 unleashed	 during	 those
unstable	 times	 had	 marred	 the	 Asura	 claim	 of	 dharma	 and	 compassion,
forever.	 But,	 I	 had	 built	 my	 empire	 on	 the	 shoulders	 of	 men	 such	 as
Vajradhamstra.	Without	men	like	him,	who	did	not	bat	an	eyelid	to	take	the	life
of	another;	who	revelled	in	cruelty;	the	empire	would	have	remained	a	twinkle
in	the	eye	of	a	poor	half-caste,	half-	starved	Asura	boy.
As	 I	 moved	 out	 with	 my	 ministers	 and	 relatives	 in	 my	 wake,	 the	 crowd
that	had	thronged	to	see	the	dead	commander,	parted.	I	stood	before	the	lifeless
body	of	my	chief	soldier	with	my	head	bowed.	The	muffled	cries	of	his	wife
and	 daughter	 could	 be	 heard	 in	 the	 uneasy	 silence.	 I	 could	 not	 control	 the
shaking	of	my	hands	as	I	touched	the	cold	feet	of	the	corpse.	I	prayed	to	the	allforgiving	 Shiva.	 I	 prayed	 for	 the	 soul	 of	 the	 man	 who	 had	 committed	 the
greatest	crimes	possible	so	that	his	people	would	regain	their	lost	honour.
A	 procession	 of	 dead	 bodies	 came	 through	 the	 streets.	 Lesser	 men	 who
had	been	slain	along	with	their	commander	were	brought	in.	As	the	fiery,	red

sun	immersed	itself	in	the	sea,	thick	black	smoke	rose	from	the	funeral	pyres
of	my	men,	who	had	laid	down	their	lives	defending	the	Asura	homeland	from
Rama’s	army.	Across	the	sea,	on	the	other	end	of	the	half-broken	ford,	I	could
see	the	twinkling	fires	of	the	enemy’s	funeral	pyres.	But	the	collective	sadness
of	the	kin	of	the	slaughtered	could	scarcely	subdue	the	general	gaiety	that	filled
our	 camp.	 We	 had	 withstood	 the	 superior	 Devas	 and	 given	 them	 a	 thrashing
they	 would	 not	 forget.	 I	 hoped	 the	 barbarians	 would	 go	 away,	 leaving	 my
daughter	with	me.	I	was	too	old	to	sacrifice	good	men	in	a	meaningless	war.
The	hatred	I	had	felt	for	the	Devas	had	long	since	lost	its	edge.	I	had	matured
beyond	the	adolescent	pursuits	of	honour,	revenge,	war,	campaigns	and	racial
superiority.	The	world	was	large	enough	for	both	the	Devas	and	the	Asuras.	It
was	 broad	 enough	 to	 accommodate	 Rama	 and	 Ravana.	 Just	 let	 him	 leave	 my
daughter	 alone.	 He	 had	 never	 treated	 her	 well	 and	 never	 would.	 It	 was	 in	 his
veins.	 He	 was	 trained	 to	 treat	 women	 like	 worms.	 They	 made	 a	 strange	 pair,
this	Rama	and	Lakshmana	–	while	one	was	willing	to	fight	and	kill	thousands
of	men	and	women	for	the	sake	of	a	wife	he	had	never	wanted,	the	other	left	his
wife	to	languish	in	his	palace	for	fourteen,	long	years.
As	 the	 funeral	 pyres	 slowly	 died	 out	 and	 the	 crowd	 of	 commoners
thinned,	I	walked	towards	my	chambers.	The	moon	was	three-fourths	full	and
cast	a	magical,	silvery	light	over	Lanka.	The	sea	was	calm	and	a	gentle	breeze
ruffled	 the	 coconut	 palms.	 The	 thin,	 silvery	 blades	 of	 the	 palm	 leaves	 caught
the	 moonlight	 on	 their	 edges	 and	 made	 lovely	 patterns	 on	 the	 sand.	 It	 was	 a
beautiful	night,	except	for	the	recently	widowed	women	and	orphaned	children.
I	did	not	wish	to	dwell	on	the	horrors	of	the	war.	Ragas	were	forming	in	my
head.	 As	 I	 entered	 my	 chambers,	 my	 eye	 caught	 the	 moon	 reflecting	 on	 the
strings	of	my	Rudra	Veena.	It	was	a	long	time	since	I	had	played	the	instrument.
I	 had	 got	 this	 particular	 instrument	 from	 the	 foothills	 of	 the	 Himalayas.	 That
was	a	trip	when	all	of	us	had	been	buried	under	an	avalanche.	The	majesty	of
the	 great	 mountains,	 the	 abode	 of	 my	 beloved	 God	 Shiva,	 had	 overawed	 me.
The	 near	 death	 experience	 and	 subsequent	 recuperation	 in	 a	 peasant’s	 hut,
taught	me	humility.	It	also	taught	me	about	the	insignificance	of	human	life.	I
learnt	about	the	beauty	of	life	and	discovered	the	musician	in	me	in	that	remote
Himalayan,	 pastoral	 village.	 The	 twang	 of	 the	 Rudra	 Veena	 had	 initially
irritated	my	ears.	But	slowly,	it	captured	my	imagination.	By	the	time	I	boarded
my	Vimana	to	head	back	to	my	southern	abode,	I	had	become	a	virtuoso.	Then
music	 became	 my	 passion	 and	 I	 experimented	 with	 the	 Asura	 Chenda,
Mrudangam,	 Milavu,	 Timila	 and	 Maddallam,	 with	 the	 haunting	 Gandharva

tunes	of	the	flute.	Artists	from	all	over	the	country	and	beyond	came	to	me	as	I
became	known	as	a	connoisseur	of	fine	music.	I	spent	many	magical	nights	in
the	gardens	of	Lanka,	where	I	forgot	all	the	tensions	and	stress	of	running	an
empire	and	floated	in	the	rhythms	and	tunes	of	my	musicians,	in	the	Ragas	that
flowed	 from	 my	 nimble	 fingers	 as	 they	 caressed	 the	 strings	 of	 the	 Rudra
Veena.
Today	was	such	a	magical	night.	I	was	filled	with	the	urge	to	caress	the
sinuous	body	of	the	Veena.	As	a	lover	takes	his	beloved,	I	took	the	Veena	and
gently	 placed	 her	 in	 my	 lap.	 Then	 I	 forgot	 the	 war;	 I	 forgot	 Rama	 and	 his
monkey-men;	I	 forgot	the	dead	and	the	living	 and	myself.	I	became	a	 feather
floating	 in	 the	 wind,	 carefree,	 rootless,	 purposeless	 and	 weightless.	 I	 was
bound	neither	to	the	earth	nor	the	sky.	I	was	just	me,	barely	aware	of	the	touch
of	my	beloved	wife,	Mandodari,	as	she	came	and	sat	near	me,	with	her	lovely
face	resting	on	 my	 shoulder.	I	was	barely	 aware	of	the	party	going	on	in	 the
garden	beneath,	celebrating	the	temporary	victory	of	the	Asuras.	As	my	fingers
caressed	the	strings,	I	was	only	aware	that	I	existed	in	the	celestial	sound	that
flew	from	them.	That	was	more	than	enough	for	me.
“Where	is	my	son,	your	Highness?”	The	spell	broke	and	I	came	back	to
the	ugly	world	of	wars	and	death.	I	woke	with	anger	flaring	in	my	eyes.	From
the	 shadows	 of	 the	 curtains,	 the	 ugly	 and	 stooped	 figure	 of	 Bhadra	 emerged.
‘How	 dare	 this	 beggar	 enter	 my	 private	 chambers?	 Who	 allowed	 him	 in?’
Before	I	could	react,	he	had	fallen	at	my	feet	and	grasped	my	legs	with	both	his
hands.	I	stood	still,	not	knowing	what	to	do.	Then	I	slowly	raised	him	up.	The
stench	 of	 sweat	 and	 stale	 liquor	 hit	 my	 nose.	 I	 gasped	 involuntarily.
Immediately,	Bhadra	moved	away	and	shrank	like	a	frightened	mouse.
“It	is	alright,”	I	said,	even	though	my	voice	did	not	carry	any	conviction.
“I	am	sorry	for	touching	and	polluting	you.”	His	voice	cracked	while	his
eyes	looked	down.
Mandodari	 moved	 quickly	 towards	 the	 old	 man	 and	 took	 his	 hands.	 He
tried	 to	 wriggle	 away.	 With	 more	 compassion	 than	 I	 could	 ever	 muster,	 she
asked,	“Bhadra,	what	happened?”
In	 answer,	 he	 broke	 into	 sobs.	 I	 was	 assaulted	 with	 various	 emotions	 –
anger	that	this	fellow	had	broken	into	one	of	the	most	magical	moments	of	my
life;	ashamed	that	he	had	awakened	dormant	thoughts	of	impurity,	that	had	lain
hidden	in	the	dark	alleys	of	my	mind;	sorry	that	I	did	not	treat	the	beggar	in	a
kinder	 way;	 happy	 that	 my	 queen	 at	 least	 remained	 compassionate	 enough	 to
understand	the	distress	of	this	poor	man.	With	my	mind	in	shambles,	I	vaguely

heard	that	Bhadra	had	been	searching	for	his	adopted	son,	Athikaya.	In	some
corner	 of	 my	 mind,	 I	 knew	 Athikaya	 was	 of	 my	 blood,	 and	 that	 I	 had
deliberately	forgotten	it.	I	had	pushed	such	irritatiadra	had	bng	memories	into
the	dark	attics	of	my	mind.	I	felt	that	this	old	beggar	was	invading	my	private
and	dirty	attic,	where	I	had	kept	my	dark	secrets	hidden	from	the	world.
My	 son	 burst	 into	 the	 room.	 I	 could	 smell	 his	 inebriated	 condition.	 He
smelt	of	wine,	women,	and	arrogance.	Like	his	shadow,	a	dark	figure	entered
the	 room.	 Seeing	 him,	 Bhadra	 rushed	 to	 him.	 Athikaya	 pushed	 the	 old	 man
rudely	away.	Bhadra	staggered	and	fell.	My	face	burnt	with	anger	and	shame.
The	scoundrel,	black	and	ugly	Athikaya	leaned	on	my	son	Meghanada	like	an
equal.	And	they	were	creating	a	ruckus	in	the	Emperor ’s	private	chamber.
“Father,	 we	 thrashed	 those	 bastards!	 You	 should	 have	 seen	 how	 I	 set	 a
dhothi	on	fire.	Hoooooo.	.	.	and	Athikaya’s	arrow	struck	Lakshmana’s	back.	.
.ha	ha.	.	.	I	do	not	know	how	he	will	sit.	.	.”	And	Athikaya	joined	in	the	laughter
and	slapped	the	Prince	hard	on	his	back.
“Meghanada.	.	.”	I	shouted	at	the	top	of	my	voice.	“This	is	no	language	to
use	before	your	parents.”
“Athikaya.	.	.	say	shorry	to	papa.”	I	stepped	forward	and	slapped	him	hard
across	his	face.	He	was	stunned	for	a	moment,	then,	without	saying	a	word,	he
went	out,	his	head	hung	in	shame.	Athikaya	followed.
Bhadra	threw	himself	forward	and	tried	to	block	their	path.	“Athikaya,	do
not	go.	Please	come	with	me.	We’ll	go	away.	We’ll	go	to	the	mainland.	Please
come	with	us.”
“Get	out	of	my	way,	you	old	rascal.”	Athikaya	pushed	Bhadra	with	a	force
that	 made	 the	 old	 man	 stagger	 and	 fall.	 “May	 you	 rot	 in	 hell!”	 Cursing,
Athikaya	followed	Meghanada	into	the	darkness.
Mandodari	said	something	to	me	but	I	raised	a	hand	and	waved	her	away.
I	wanted	to	be	alone.	I	stood	looking	at	the	eerily	beautiful,	moonlit	night.	Sons
were	 sons,	 whether	 they	 were	 born	 in	 a	 palace	 or	 a	 hut.	 But	 this	 kind	 of
arrogance	 was	 the	 harbinger	 of	 disaster.	 But	 who	 could	 find	 fault	 with	 the
youth?	I	had	behaved	worse	with	my	father.	Suddenly,	a	shriek,	followed	by	a
huge	 commotion,	 broke	 out	 in	 the	 palace	 gardens,	 where	 the	 celebration	 had
been	going	on.	Something	had	gone	terribly	wrong.	With	my	heart	pounding
against	 my	 ribs,	 I	 ran	 towards	 the	 garden,	 lithely	 stepping	 over	 the	 heartbroken	figure	of	Bhadra	lying	on	the	floor	of	my	chambers.

49	Death	visits	again
Bhadra
I	got	up	after	a	while.	My	heart	was	heavy.	What	was	the	use	of	anything?
There	 was	 nothing	 now	 to	 look	 forward	 to.	 My	 son	 had	 been	 lost	 forever.	 I
knew	I	would	never	see	him	again	or	maybe	only	as	a	lifeless	body.	Strangely,
I	felt	empathy	for	the	Asura	King,	not	as	our	Emperor,	not	as	the	great	leader
who	 had	 given	 his	 life	 and	 valour	 for	 the	 Asura	 race,	 but	 as	 one	 distressed
father	 to	 another.	 Stripped	 of	 his	 royal	 robes	 and	 shining	 crown,	 he	 was	 just
like	me.	Or	was	I	fooling	myself?	Are	the	powerful	and	the	mighty	unhappy	in
a	different	way?
A	 blanket	of	silence	shrouded	the	palace.	In	the	faint	light	coming	from
the	 durbar,	 I	 saw	 shadows	 among	 the	 shrubs	 and	 trees	 of	 the	 garden.
Something	 secret	 was	 going	 on.	 I	 had	 decided	 long	 ago	 that	 the	 affairs	 of
important	men	were	none	of	my	concern.	But	curiosity	got	the	better	of	me.	I
peeped	through	the	open	windows	and	saw	the	Emperor	sitting	on	his	throne,
his	face	deathly	pale	and	his	ministers	huddled	around	a	few	limp	bodies	on	the
floor.	I	became	tense.	Had	something	happened	to	Athikaya?	I	waited	with	bated
breath	for	someone	to	move	so	that	I	could	get	a	better	view.
“It	 is	 inexcusable.”	 t.	 Hahe	 Emperor	 said	 in	 an	 icy	 voice.	 The	 ministers
shifted	restlessly.
“I	woke	three	hours	ago.	When	I	got	there,	the	scene	was	grotesque.	Our
people	 were	 being	 slaughtered.	 It	 was	 pitch	 black.	 It	 wasn’t	 clear	 who	 was
butchering	 whom.	 Initially,	 I	 thought	 a	 victory	 party	 had	 gone	 awry	 and	 our
people	were	butchering	each	other.	I	moved	away	from	and	called	the	sentries.
As	we	approached,	I	saw	two	dark	figures.	I	am	not	sure,	but	almost	certain	that
they	were	none	other	than	Hanuman	and	Angada.	I	tried	to	apprehend	them	and
threw	 my	 dagger	 at	 Angada	 and	 injured	 him,	 but	 in	 the	 confusion,	 they

escaped.	That	was	when	your	Highness	reached	the	scene.	Probably,	Angada’s
cry	alerted	your	Highness,”	Prahastha	concluded	and	a	tense	silence	followed.
“This	is	an	insider	job.	I	think	we	are	going	down	in	the	usual	Asura	way.
We	almost	triumphed	today	but	then	we	snatch	defeat	from	the	jaws	of	victory.
I	think	we	deserve	to	be	slaves.	Two	of	my	senior	ministers	butchered	in	my
own	gardens.	We	are	dealing	with	an	enemy	who	has	no	scruples,	no	sense	of
fair	play	and	dharma.	They	are	ruthless	barbarians	who	will	stoop	to	any	level
to	achieve	their	goals.	And	we	are	infested	with	spies	and	traitors.	My	brother
became	a	traitor,	my	friend	became	a	traitor.	I	wonder	who	else	will	help	the
Devas?	 Sumali	 and	 Malyavan	 were	 good	 men.	 They	 may	 not	 have	 been
warriors,	nor	did	they	deserve	this	end.	Rudraka,	this	has	now	become	an	allout	war	without	scruples.	Our	aim	should	be	to	create	maximum	damage	in	the
enemy	 ranks.	 I	 do	 not	 want	 us	 to	 stoop	 to	 their	 level	 of	 dastardly	 terrorist
attacks	 and	 killing	 people	 in	 their	 sleep.	 But	 I	 think	 we	 are	 justified	 in	 using
ruse	to	capture	them.	Find	my	son,	if	he	has	returned	to	sobriety,	and	bring	him
here.	 Prahastha,	 you	 will	 handle	 what	 Sumali	 and	 Malyavan	 did,	 till	 peace
returns.	 Let	 us	 strategize	 and	 give	 them	 a	 lesson	 in	 their	 own	 way.”	 The
Emperor	sounded	resolute	and	grim.
I	took	a	deep	breath.	It	was	the	old	ministers.	They	were	good	men	with
integrity	in	public	life,	but	their	deaths	were	of	no	concern	to	me.	The	world
was	full	of	men	like	them	who	could	be	replaced	without	batting	an	eyelid	and
nobody	 would	 know	 the	 difference.	 But	 what	 was	 happening	 inside	 was
fascinating	 and	 I	 stood	 glued	 to	 my	 position.	 Soon,	 I	 saw	 Meghanada	 and
Athikaya	 enter	 the	 durbar.	 The	 ministers	 were	 seated	 in	 their	 chairs,	 but	 the
bodies	 of	 the	 two	 ministers	 who	 had	 been	 slain,	 lay	 on	 the	 floor	 with	 their
heads	 turned	 towards	 the	 south.	 Oil	 lamps	 made	 out	 of	 coconut	 shells
flickering	near	their	heads.	Athikaya	and	Meghanada	were	shocked	when	they
saw	 the	 dead.	 Nobody	 spoke	 for	 a	 while.	 The	 two	 youngsters	 bowed	 to	 the
ground	 to	 pay	 obeisance	 to	 the	 dead.	 Then	 Meghanada	 assumed	 his	 seat	 with
Athikaya	 on	 the	 floor	 near	 him.	 Ravana	 raised	 an	 eyebrow	 at	 the	 sight	 of
Athikaya,	but	the	youngsters	ignored	the	distaste	of	their	elders.
“Tomorrow,	 when	 Rudraka	 strikes	 from	 the	 eastern	 side,	 Prahastha	 will
attack	 from	 the	 sea	 with	 the	 captured	 ships	 and	 will	 try	 to	 either	 sink	 or	 take
more	pirate	ships.	I	am	sure	the	brothers	will	be	leading	the	attack.	Since	their
bridge	collapsed	yesterday,	they	might	use	canoes	today	and	try	to	take	our	left
flank	from	the	northern	side	of	the	city.	We	will	use	the	hills	to	our	advantage
and	ensure	that	boulders	are	employed	to	maximum	effect.	Wait	till	the	enemy

reaches	our	city	gates	 and	then	shower	them	with	stones	and	 boiling	oil.	Use
the	 catapults	 and	 flame-throwers	 effectively.	 Prahastha	 will	 surround	 them
from	the	sea	and	cut	off	their	retreat,	or	at	least	engage	Varuna,	so	that	they	do
not	get	any	support	from	the	 sea.	Put	Dhumraksha,	the	assistant	chief-of-army
on	 that	 task.	 He’ll	 have	 to	 create	 maximum	 impact	 and	 create	 panic	 in	 the
Vanara	ranks.	When	they	are	attacked	from	all	sides,	Surantaka,	the	chief	of	the
stable	task.s,	 will	 let	loose	the	royal	elephants	by	opening	the	fort	gate.	They
will	not	expect	us	to	open	the	fort	gate.	Draw	them	in	and	allow	them	to	think
they	 have	 breached	 the	 citadel	 of	 the	 Asuras.	 When	 they	 are	 trapped	 in	 the
narrow	 confines	 between	 the	 hills	 and	 the	 city	 walls,	 let	 the	 beasts	 loose.	 We
will	show	the	Vanaras	what	we	are	capable	of.
And	you,	Meghanada,	I	want	to	talk	to	you	in	private.	I	will	assign	you	a
task	which	will	break	the	back	of	the	Deva	army.	Make	funeral	arrangements
for	 our	 slain	 heroes.	 Visit	 the	 homes	 of	 those	 slain	 in	 today’s	 battle	 and
comfort	their	kin.	We	must	assure	them	that	the	entire	Asura	community	is	with
them	 in	 their	 bereavement	 and	 that	 the	 nation	 does	 not	 forsake	 its	 martyrs.”
With	this,	the	Emperor	rose	from	his	throne	and	so	did	the	entire	durbar.
The	eastern	skies	were	painted	saffron	and	the	birds	were	chirping	in	the
trees.	I	was	both	thrilled	by	and	afraid	of	what	the	Asura	Emperor	was	doing.	I
was	 happy	 that	 at	 last	 he	 was	 leading	 from	 the	 front.	 He	 had	 regained	 his
vigour,	 now	 tempered	 with	 experience.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 he	 faced	 a	 sly	 and
ruthless	 enemy	 who	 did	 not	 care	 even	 when	 civilians	 were	 killed	 and	 burnt
enemy	cities	through	arson	and	treachery.	It	was	a	bloody	and	brutal	war	and
my	son	was	part	of	some	secret	scheme.	I	did	not	want	him	to	take	any	part	in
this	war.	But	sons	are	sons.	I	was	tired.	I	went	home,	leaving	scheming	kings
and	invading	princes	far	behind.	I	wanted	to	drink	and	sleep	like	a	log.

50	For	whose	sake?
Ravana
The	loss	of	two	of	my	ministers	was	a	great	blow.	This	war	was	different
from	any	other	war	I	had	fought.	My	palace	was	swarmed	with	spies.	Assassins
struck	 with	 impunity.	 I	 hoped	 that	 today	 we	 would	 finish	 off	 that	 upstart	 of	 a
Deva	prince.	I	had	heard	that	that	the	Vanaras	believed	him	to	be	an	avatar	 of
Vishnu	himself.	‘That	is	a	good	piece	of	propaganda,	I	must	admit.	Claim	that
God	is	with	you,	or	better,	you	are	God,	then	anything	you	do,	any	adharma	you
commit,	 becomes	 divine	 play.’	 I	 was	 shocked	 to	 learn	 that	 many	 common
Asuras	had	also	begun	to	believe	in	Rama’s	divinity.	Making	your	wife	suffer
exile	in	the	 forest,	 killing	 a	friendly	king	through	deceit,	sending	terrorist	to
cities	 and	 annihilating	 innocent	 men,	 women	 and	 children…were	 these	 the
marks	of	divinity?	The	naivety	of	the	people	was	mind-boggling.
Today,	 hopefully,	 if	 Shiva	 was	 willing,	 I	 would	 tear	 off	 the	 mask	 of
divinity.	 I	 was	 restless	 and	 wanted	 to	 get	 into	 action	 and	 see	 the	 Deva	 prince
face	 to	 face.	 He	 was	 much	 younger	 than	 me,	 but	 the	 strength	 in	 my	 arms
remained.	 Prahastha	 had	 advised	 me	 not	 to	 venture	 into	 the	 battlefield	 as	 it
would	 be	 too	 risky.	 There	 were	 plenty	 of	 traitors	 in	 our	 midst	 and	 one	 stray
arrow	from	my	own	ranks	could	finish	the	Asura	empire	forever.	But	I	longed
for	action.	How	could	I	remain	shut	in	my	chamber	when	my	people	were	in
grave	 danger?	 I	 called	 for	 a	 guard	 and	 ordered	 the	 sentries	 to	 line	 up	 in	 the
verandah.	I	choose	the	right	one	who	had	my	build	and	dismissed	the	others.	I
asked	the	suitable	one	to	strip	and	kept	him	locked	in	one	of	the	smaller	rooms.
Then	I	 left	for	battle	 in	 his	uniform.	I	knew	it	was	foolish	and	juvenile,	 but	I
could	not	help	myself.	I	wanted	to	be	in	the	action	and	see	how	my	people	were
faring.
I	went	to	the	stables,	took	the	first	horse	I	could	find	and	rode	off	towards

the	eastern	gates.	I	could	see	dust	rising	like	a	cloud	from	there.	The	confusion
and	violence	that	met	me	as	I	entered	the	fray	was	unimaginable.	As	planned,
Surantaka	heahad	let	the	royal	elephants	loose	on	the	monkey-men.	They	were
caught	in	the	narrow	corridor	between	the	fort	wall	and	the	cliff	that	rose	more
than	300	feet	high.	The	monkey	infantry,	who	had	rushed	in	when	the	fort	gates
had	 opened,	 found	 themselves	 trapped	 between	 the	 charging	 elephants	 and
Rudraka’s	 mighty	 cavalry.	 I	 rode	 to	 a	 nearby	 hillock	 inside	 the	 fort	 to	 get	 a
better	view.
The	 Vanaras	 were	 being	 butchered.	 Huge	 boulders	 landed	 on	 them	 with
sickening	thuds	from	the	cliff	top.	Arrows	rained	down	from	Rudraka’s	men.
Huge	barrels	of	boiling	oil	were	dropped	onto	the	hapless	Vanaras	and	some
accidently	 spilt	 on	 the	 rampaging	 elephants,	 driving	 them	 insane	 with	 pain.
Sugreeva	 had	 led	 the	 enemy	 attack	 and	 I	 could	 see	 him	 desperately	 trying	 to
rally	 his	 men.	 Arrows	 zoomed	 past,	 perilously	 close	 to	 his	 head,	 and	 few
struck	 him	 in	 the	 shoulder	 and	 thighs,	 but	 the	 monkey-king	 held	 on.	 But	 his
escape	 route	 had	 been	 sealed.	 He	 would	 not	 escape	 this	 trap	 alive.	 Rudraka
would	 see	 to	 that.	 This	 part	 of	 our	 plan	 had	 worked	 well.	 I	 rode	 towards	 the
northern	end,	where	Rama	and	Lakshmana	were	leading	the	attack.
Meghanada	had	waited	until	the	attackers	reached	the	northern	gates	and
then	 the	 Asura	 chariots	 rolled	 in	 from	 outside	 the	 fort.	 The	 horses	 had	 been
walked	 in	 the	 dead	 of	 the	 night	 to	 a	 nearby	 jungle	 and	 hidden	 there.	 Only	 a
token	force	remained	near	the	northern	gate.	The	chariots	were	taken	apart	and
carried	into	the	jungle.	Then,	before	dawn,	the	chariots	were	reassembled	and
by	mid-morning,	Meghanada’s	charioteers	charged	in	and	attacked	Rama	from
the	rear.
Meanwhile,	 Prahastha	 had	 managed	 to	 drive	 Varuna’s	 fleet	 far	 away,	 so
Rama’s	 armies	 had	 no	 naval	 support.	 With	 alarming	 swiftness,	 Meghanada’s
charioteers	 surrounded	 the	 Vanara	 army	 and	 started	 their	 butchering.	 Asuras
who	had	hidden	in	the	trees	and	in	the	citadel	and	laid	low	during	the	morning
attack,	 rose	 together	 as	 planned,	 to	 shower	 arrows	 on	 Rama’s	 men.	 The
brothers	were	trapped.	One	flank	was	closed	by	Meghanada.	‘Who	was	taking
care	of	the	other	flank?’	I	craned	my	neck	to	get	a	better	view.	Whoever	it	was,
he	was	doing	a	better	job	than	Meghanada.	Then	when	the	dust	cleared	a	little,	I
saw	him.	It	was	Athikaya,	my	son.	The	Vanara	army	had	been	surrounded	on
all	 sides	 and	 the	 Asuras	 were	 decimating	 the	 monkeys.	 Only	 Hanuman’s
infantry	 held	 on	 and	 fought	 with	 grit	 and	 determination.	 The	 majority	 of
Rama’s	men	were	now	trapped	on	the	other	side	of	the	half-broken	bridge	to

the	 mainland.	 Prowling	 canoes	 and	 Prahastha‘s	 captured	 fleet,	 effectively	 cut
off	Rama’s	reckless	front	men	from	the	cautious	ones	who	had	stayed	back	on
the	 mainland	 under	 the	 command	 of	 the	 wily	 old	 rascal,	 Jambavan,	 the
octogenarian	commander	of	Bali,	still	serving	under	Sugreeva.
I	rode	back	to	the	palace,	half	amused	by	my	adolescent	urge	for	heroics.
My	 people	 were	 fighting	 to	 plan.	 If	 all	 went	 well,	 we	 would	 be	 holding	 a
victory	 party	 tonight.	 I	 had	 got	 rid	 of	 the	 disguise	 by	 the	 time	 I	 reached	 the
palace	 gates.	 But	 Jambavan’s	 reticence	 nagged	 me.	 ‘Why	 was	 the	 wily	 old
enemy	commander	holding	his	men	back?	Was	it	another	ruse?	And	where	was
Varuna?’	The	reports	I	 got	indicated	that	he	had	sailed	his	fleet	 deep	into	 the
sea,	 far	 from	 the	 island,	 towards	 the	 mainland.	 But	 that	 was	 unusual	 for	 the
pirate-King.	‘What	was	it	that	I	was	missing?’	I	missed	Prahastha.
I	walked	towards	the	garden	to	see	my	daughter.	Here	in	the	garden,	it	was
a	different	world.	Faint	noises	of	battle	could	be	heard	by	discerning	ears,	but
otherwise	it	was	just	a	normal	day.	I	suppressed	my	thoughts	and	worries	about
the	 war	 and	 Rama,	 and	 stood	 under	 the	 shade	 of	 a	 sprawling	 tamarind	 tree,
soaking	in	the	beauty	of	the	world	arouse	ind	me.	I	could	hear	the	soft	whisper
of	the	sea	and	see	the	wind	rustling	the	leaves.	I	found	rhythm	in	the	orchestra
that	the	crickets	had	set	up	in	my	backyard.	My	mind	raced	back	to	my	glorious
boyhood	 spent	in	the	 forests	of	this	island	and	in	the	Sahya	 mountains	 of	 the
mainland	It	was	amazing	how	easily	the	mind	forgot	the	painful	past,	grinding
poverty,	daily	humiliations,	and	the	pangs	of	hunger,	and	only	remembered	the
little	 moments	 of	 happiness.	 There	 was	 a	 pleasurable	 pain	 in	 nostalgia;	 a
yearning	 for	 things	 that	 were	 lost	 forever;	 a	 magic	 woven	 over	 things	 that
could	 have	 been	 but	 did	 not;	 a	 dusting	 of	 secret	 hopes	 and	 sweet	 frustrated
longings.	 And	 there	 were	 small	 things	 in	 the	 everyday	 world,	 if	 one	 listened
with	your	heart,	like	the	cooing	of	the	cuckoo,	or	the	chatter	of	the	squirrels,
where	 painful	 things	 remain	 hidden	 in	 the	 shadows	 and	 long-forgotten
happiness	glows	once	again.
She	 looked	 angelic	 sitting	 under	 the	 Ashoka	 tree.	 Beside	 her,	 looking
smug,	was	my	niece,	Trijata.	I	was	not	pleased	to	find	her	with	Sita.	I	wished	to
speak	 to	 my	 daughter	 alone.	 Trijata,	 in	 more	 ways	 than	 one,	 resembled	 her
loafer	 father.	 Kumbha	 lived	 his	 own	 life	 of	 debauchery.	 His	 once	 grand
ambitions	had	been	thwarted	by	a	lack	of	determination	and	character.	He	was
usually	dead	drunk	in	his	chambers.	He	had	yearned	for	immortal	fame	and	an
empire	 of	 his	 own,	 but	 never	 had	 the	 will	 to	 achieve	 greater	 things	 in	 life.
Perhaps	 I	 had	 overshadowed	 him.	 I	 was	 always	 the	 big	 brother.	 And	 no	 one

resents	your	success	more	than	your	siblings.	Perhaps	it	was	plain	bad	luck	that
I	 had	 become	 what	 I	 had.	 I	 was	 at	 an	 age	 when	 I	 no	 longer	 thought	 that	 hard
work,	 determination	 and	 ambition	 determine	 one’s	 destiny.	 The	 atheist	 in	 me
had	 died	 an	 unceremonious	 death	 long	 ago.	 I	 had	 seen	 too	 many	 things	 to
naively	 believe	 that	 man	 created	 his	 own	 destiny	 and	 nothing	 else	 mattered.
Hindsight	 made	 me	 ashamed	 to	 think	 of	 the	 childish	 conversation	 I	 had	 had,
years	ago,	in	that	dark	cave,	with	the	real	Asura	Emperor,	Mahabali.	I	smiled	at
the	 memory	 of	 my	 brashness	 and	 stupidity	 and	 the	 kitsch	 philosophy	 I	 had
used,	trying	to	impress	the	old	man.	There	was	something	beyond	the	mental
grasp	of	man	that	defied	common	sense.	Determination,	hard	work,	and	all	the
things	 the	 gurus	 talk	 about,	 were	 useful	 only	 to	 determine	 how	 to	 react	 to
random	 things	 that	 happened.	 But	 I	 saw	 order	 in	 things,	 the	 way	 the	 day	 and
night	 alter	 or	 the	 way	 living	 things	 take	 birth,	 live	 and	 die.	 Yet	 many	 things
could	only	be	explained	by	a	randomness	called	fate.
I	 was	 shaken	 from	 my	 musings	 by	 Sita’s	 laughter.	 I	 looked	 at	 her.	 She
seemed	so	divinely	beautiful.	She	had	inherited	her	spirit	and	passion	from	me
and	her	perfect	face	and	body	from	Mandodari.	How	could	I	lose	her	now?
“Oh!	the	King	of	Kings,	the	Emperor	of	the	Asuras…	have	you	come	to
pay	 me	 a	 visit?	 Ravana,	 count	 your	 hours.	 My	 Rama	 has	 come	 to	 finish	 you
and	your	evil	empire.	You	Rakshasas	 and	 all	 that	 you	 have	 built,	 all	 that	 you
are	proud	of,	will	soon	be	ashes.	My	husband	has	come	to	deliver	me	and	I	can
see	your	evil	empire	collapsing.	If	you	value	the	life	of	your	kin,	go	and	fall	at
his	feet.	But	I	know	you	will	not,	you	are	too	proud	for	that	kind	of	wisdom.
Mark	my	words,	Rakshasa,	your	time	has	come.”	She	dissolved	into	a	peal	of
laughter	and	looked	positively	loathsome	in	her	hatred.	Trijata	looked	at	me,
embarrassed	and	afraid.
I	turned	back,	dejected	and	abashed.	‘Why	can’t	I	bring	myself	to	tell	her
the	 truth	 that	 I	 am	 her	 father?’	 I	 had	 been	 trying	 to	 rescue	 her	 from	 her
husband.	But	how	could	I	look	at	her	face	and	justify	my	act	of	abandoning	her
because	of	some	superstitions?	And	how	I	could	ignore	the	burning	love	she
had	for	her	husband,	the	Deva	prince	Rama?	W	her	facehy	could	she	not	see
that	her	father	loved	her	more	than	her	husband?	Why	could	she	not	see	that	I
was	 staking	 everything	 I	 had,	 for	 her	 happiness?	 But	 then,	 why	 did	 not	 she
know	 that	 she	 would	 never	 be	 happy	 with	 her	 husband	 and	 the	 moment	 my
protection	 was	 gone,	 her	 suffering	 would	 start?	 Perhaps	 I	 fooled	 myself.
Perhaps	they	would	live	on	as	the	most	idealized	couple,	the	dark-skinned	Deva
prince	and	his	lovely	wife,	and	I	would	become	the	evil	monster	who	tried	to

destroy	 their	 happiness.	 All	 the	 omens	 and	 astrological	 predictions	 indicated
misery	to	come	for	her	and	a	horrifying	future	for	me	and	my	people.	Could
Ravana	 change	 the	 future?	 Perhaps	 I	 was	 right	 in	 my	 youth	 after	 all	 and
Astrology	 was	 just	 humbug.	 I	 decided	 my	 own	 future	 and	 not	 some	 remote
stars	sunk	in	the	inky	blackness	of	an	indifferent	sky.	But	why	did	my	daughter
hate	 me	 such	 vengeance?	 No	 father	 should	 be	 tortured	 like	 that.	 Perhaps	 my
time	 had	 come.	 Why	 would	 I	 gamble	 my	 whole	 life	 for	 this	 woman?	 I	 was
gambling	not	just	my	life,	but	also	the	future	of	a	whole	race,	for	my	animal
passion.	Thousands	were	being	killed	at	this	moment	–	fathers,	brothers,	sons	–
families	who	had	trusted	me	and	were	fighting	for	me.	Maybe,	it	was	only	right
that	my	time	had	come.	I	was	a	worthless	king	who	had	dragged	his	people	into
an	 unnecessary	 war,	 to	 death	 and	 destruction.	 But	 how	 could	 I	 hand	 over	 my
daughter	to	Rama,	knowing	how	he	would	treat	her?	Let	fate	take	care	of	the
future.	I	would	fight	to	the	last	and	maybe	I	would	win.
The	 war	 raged	 on	 outside	 the	 palace.	 The	 shadows	 grew	 long	 and	 a
heavenly	crimson	hue	spread	over	the	city,	bathing	everything	in	an	unearthly
glow.	 My	 daughter ’s	 words	 kept	 ringing	 in	 my	 ears,	 ‘All	 that	 you	 have	 built
and	 your	 people	 will	 turn	 to	 ashes.’	 I	 wanted	 to	 get	 drunk	 and	 forget
everything.	 As	 I	 entered	 my	 palace,	 they	 brought	 in	 the	 still	 body	 of	 my
commander,	Rudraka.	Maybe,	my	daughter	had	known	better	than	me.

51	A	hero	returns
Bhadra
I	 was	 sitting	 on	 the	 verandah	 of	 my	 thatched	 hut.	 The	 steaming	 hot
porridge	and	mango	pickle	my	wife	had	put	down	near	me	had	grown	cold	and
sticky.	 The	 flies	 had	 become	 bolder	 and	 lingered	 longer	 on	 the	 edges	 of	 the
bowl.	 I	 did	 not	 have	 the	 will	 to	 shoo	 them	 away.	 The	 familiar	 but
indecipherable	clatter	of	vessels	and	the	stirring	of	pots	could	be	heard	from
the	kitchen	where	my	wife	was	busy	with	her	chores.	I	had	a	mild	headache	–
yesterday’s	 hangover.	 Business	 was	 dull.	 Who	 needed	 clothes	 washed	 now
when	tomorrow	you	might	be	dead?
Though	 I	 had	 resigned	 myself	 to	 the	 fate	 of	 my	 son,	 I	 found	 myself
looking	out	longingly	for	the	appearance	of	that	tall,	bulky	figure.	Sometimes	I
hoped	 he	 would	 come	 home	 hurt,	 so	 that	 we	 could	 nurse	 him	 back	 to	 health.
But	 I	 knew	 he	 would	 never	 leave	 the	 battlefield	 or	 his	 friend	 and	 brother,
Meghanada.	Death	had	come	marching	into	our	street	many	times	since	the	war
had	begun.	Many	of	the	neighbours	had	already	lost	loved	ones.	There	was	a
general	numbness	in	the	air	now.	Initially	there	had	been	emotional	outbursts.
The	streets	saw	funeral	processions	of	slain	Asura	warriors	and	emotions	ran
high.	 But	 when	 the	 body	 count	 increased,	 death	 lost	 its	 novelty	 and	 heroism
became	cheap	and	commonplace.	A	general	indifference,	except	for	the	small
pool	of	sadness	in	the	immediate	family,	was	the	only	thing	the	epic	heroism	of
the	slain	warriors	generated.	It	was	as	though	the	entire	country	had	withdrawn
into	 a	 shell	 to	 brace	 itself	 for	 the	 inevitable.	 Fathers	 placed	 the	 still	 and
mangled	 remains	 of	 their	 sons	 on	 funeral	 pyres	 with	 sickening	 numbness.
Mothers	 huddled	 together	 and	 shed	 silent	 tears,	 while	 widows	 withdrew	 into
their	holes	of	lonely	bitterness.	Over	these	blunted	emotions	hung	the	spectre
of	 fear	 –	 of	 a	 Deva	 victory	 and	 the	 horribd	 tole	 future	 that	 awaited	 the	 poor,

black	Asuras	under	Rama’s	rule,	or	worse,	under	Vibhishana.
The	streets	had	become	deserted	long	ago.	Many	of	the	common	Asuras
had	 withdrawn	 into	 the	 forests	 and	 some	 had	 fled	 to	 the	 mainland	 in	 crude,
country	boats.	However,	the	majority	shut	themselves	in	their	homes,	with	their
rickety	 front	 doors	 shut	 and	 barred.	 Before	 the	 nobles	 sensed	 it,	 the	 poor
Asuras	smelt	defeat	and	destruction,	although	nobody	spoke	of	it	openly.	The
nights	were	scary.	This	war	was	different	and	every	Asura	knew	in	his	bones
that	 he	 was	 dealing	 with	 a	 ruthless	 and	 unscrupulous	 enemy	 led	 by	 generals
who	would,	under	the	cover	of	night,	set	cities	on	fire.	An	enemy	who	was	led
by	a	prince	who	would	hide	behind	a	tree	and	shoot	arrows	to	kill	a	noble	king
engaged	 in	 a	 duel	 with	 his	 brother.	 An	 enemy	 who	 was	 also	 led	 by	 a	 prince
who	 had	 stooped	 to	 cutting	 off	 the	 ears	 and	 nose	 of	 a	 woman.	 The	 shadows
lengthened	and	we	were	terrified	as	never	before.
It	 had	 been	 ten	 days	 since	 the	 war	 started	 and	 the	 losses	 were	 heavy	 on
both	sides.	News	of	the	enemy	was	scarce,	but	our	ministers	and	generals	like
Rudraka,	Vajradhamstra,	Sumali	and	Malyavan,	were	all	dead.	The	Asura	army
was	running	out	of	leaders.	Only	the	gritty	Prahastha,	who	kept	Varuna	at	bay
and	had	blocked	Rama’s	retreat	by	sea,	and	crown	prince	Meghanada,	were	the
experienced	warriors	left.	Old	and	bumbling	Mayan	was	offered	command,	but
we	heard	that	he	had	declined	it.	The	geriatric	minister	of	finance,	Jambumali,
was	 too	 old	 to	 even	 walk.	 The	 situation	 must	 have	 been	 grave	 indeed	 if
octogenarian	 scientists	 were	 being	 asked	 to	 command	 Asura	 armies.	 Ravana
himself	 should	 have	 taken	 over	 the	 command,	 but	 perhaps	 the	 Emperor	 was
too	old	for	such	a	task.	I	had	the	impulse	to	walk	towards	the	palace.	Perhaps
Athikaya	was	lying	there	somewhere,	injured	but	alive.	I	could	bring	him	back.
Wiping	my	hand	on	my	dirty	dhothi,	and	without	bothering	to	inform	my	wife,
I	walked	towards	the	palace.	For	some	time	I	was	alone	on	the	road.	Then	I	saw
men	huddled	together	near	small	eateries,	gossiping.	Most	of	the	houses	were
shut	and	looked	deserted	but	some	had	defiantly	opened	their	front	doors	and
were	putting	up	the	pretence	of	normalcy.	Muffled	cries	could	be	heard	behind
some	of	the	closed	doors.	Perhaps	a	son	was	dead,	or	a	husband.
The	 sun	 was	 fierce	 over	 my	 head.	 Perspiration	 poured	 from	 me	 and	 I
smelt	 and	 felt	 sick.	 I	 should	 have	 had	 a	 bath.	 As	 I	 neared	 the	 palace,	 the
absurdity	of	imagining	that	Athikaya	would	be	nursed	inside	the	palace	hit	me.
Athikaya	was	no	prince.	He	was	just	the	son	of	a	poor,	illiterate,	black	Asura.	If
he	was	injured,	he	would	have	been	left	for	dead	on	the	battlefield.	When	had
the	 lives	 of	 such	 fools	 been	 valuable	 to	 the	 government?	 But,	 where	 did	 he

spend	the	nights?	He	had	stopped	coming	home	long	ago.	’Did	he	sleep	outside
Prince	Meghanada’s	chamber,	or	did	he	spend	his	nights	in	the	guard’s	quarters
inside	the	fort?’	I	was	determined	to	see	him	today	and	persuade	him	to	leave
this	stupid	war	of	important	men	and	come	back	home,	though	I	knew	it	was
futile.
The	 palace	 loomed	 ahead,	 impregnable	 and	 sinister	 from	 a	 distance.	 Its
golden	dooms	and	spires	glittered	in	the	sun.	‘Gold	–	the	Emperor	uses	gold	to
decorate	his	roof	when	men	like	us	do	not	eat	one	square	meal	a	day’.	Maybe	he
deserved	to	go	down.	But	at	least	he	was	not	cruel	and	had	tried	his	to	uplift	his
people.	 I	 shuddered	 to	 think	 what	 Lanka	 would	 be	 like	 under	 Vibhishana.	 In
Ravana’s	 kingdom,	 though	 there	 were	 nobles	 and	 commoners,	 in	 theory
anyone	 could	 rise	 through	 sheer	 hard	 work	 and	 luck.	 Examples	 of	 men	 like
Rudraka,	who	was	a	common	butcher	before	he	became	a	heartless	daredevil,
and	 Sumali,	 who	 had	 been	 just	 a	 clerk	 in	 Kubera	 a	 cin	 d	 lucks	 spice	 export
department	 but	 rose	 to	 be	 minister	 and	 commander,	 were	 quoted	 by	 people
who	glorified	Ravana’s	rule.	But	I	was	a	non-entity,	one	among	the	millions	of
poor	Asuras	in	a	country	that	was	being	rapidly	Brahminised.	At	the	end	of	the
war,	 I	 would	 end	 up	 an	 untouchable,	 the	 scum	 of	 the	 earth.	 I	 badly	 needed	 a
drink	but	there	was	nothing	nearby.	I	sat	down	to	wait	and	catch	the	attention	of
some	important	official	who	might	recognize	and	take	me	inside	the	palace.	I
had	to	see	if	my	son	was	there.
It	 was	 late	 evening	 when	 I	 was	 woken	 from	 my	 tired	 slumber	 by	 the
clamour	 of	 the	 army	 marching	 back	 into	 the	 fortress	 after	 the	 day’s	 battle.
Gravely	 injured	 or	 dead	 men,	 who	 had	 been	 important	 enough,	 were	 carried
back.	Ordinary	soldiers	were	left	for	the	vultures	in	the	battlefield.	I	could	hear
my	heart	pounding	in	my	chest	as	I	looked	for	my	son	in	the	army	marching
past.	The	soldiers	were	in	high	spirits.	There	he	was!	‘No,	that	is	not	him.	Was
he	dead	and	left	in	the	field	since	he	was	just	a	black	Asura?’	I	desperately	ran
to	 the	 tired	 soldiers,	 seeking	 Athikaya	 among	 them.	 I	 tried	 to	 stop	 the	 march
and	 called	 for	 my	 son.	 There	 were	 some	 jeers	 from	 the	 group	 and	 angry
murmurs,	 but	 I	 didn’t	 give	 care.	 I	 kept	 running	 in	 and	 out	 of	 the	 marching
columns,	craning	my	neck	to	see	the	faces	of	the	dead	and	injured.	I	got	pushed
and	 shoved	 but	 ignored	 it.	 With	 growing	 desperation	 I	 looked	 for	 my	 son.
There,	 there	 he	 was	 –	 in	 the	 chariot,	 with	 Prince	 Meghanada.	 Tall,	 dark	 and
bulky,	Athikaya	stood	erect.	The	Prince	bled	from	the	wounds	on	his	limbs	and
shoulders.	 Athikaya	 had	 a	 horrible	 gash	 on	 his	 chest	 which	 he	 had	 dressed
crudely	 with	 a	 blood-soaked	 rag.	 I	 ran	 towards	 the	 chariot	 but	 was	 crudely

shoved	away	by	the	bodyguards	of	the	Prince.
“Athikaya,	my	son…”	My	hoarse	voice	did	not	carry	through	the	din	the
soldiers	 were	 making.	 I	 looked	 hopelessly	 short	 among	 the	 tall	 and	 bulky
Asura	 warriors.	 ‘How	 tall	 the	 boys	 grow	 these	 days.’	 I	 waved	 my	 hands
frantically	 and	 jumped	 and	 shouted,	 desperately	 trying	 to	 catch	 his	 attention.
Suddenly	 I	 caught	 his	 eye.	 I	 waved,	 trying	 hard	 to	 push	 myself	 towards	 the
royal	 chariot.	 I	 saw	 his	 eyes	 grow	 wide	 with	 wonder	 and	 then	 the	 wonder
turned	to	embarrassment.	My	son	was	having	the	time	of	his	life	riding	along
with	the	Asura	Crown	Prince	and	I,	the	poor	washerman,	a	nobody,	was	trying
to	 intrude	 into	 his	 high	 life.	 With	 that	 one	 look,	 he	 killed	 even	 the	 slightest
hope	I	had	dared	to	cherish	within	me.	But	then	I	was	just	his	foster	father.	He
did	not	belong	to	the	shack	of	a	poor,	black	Asura.	He	was	of	the	Emperor ’s
blood,	ill	begotten	yes,	but	a	half	prince	nevertheless.	He	belonged	to	a	world
where	worms	like	me	did	not	exist.	He	belonged	to	a	world	of	mighty	men	and
legendary	heroes,	who	would	be	talked	about	for	thousands	of	years	after	their
deaths.	Men	like	Bhadra	did	not	matter.
Suddenly	 the	 Prince	 saw	 me.	 He	 gestured	 and	 the	 row	 of	 bodyguards
parted.	 For	 a	 moment,	 I	 stood	 there	 dazed,	 then	 I	 walked	 towards	 the	 chariot
apprehensively.	‘Had	 the	 entire	 column	 stopped	 for	 me?	 Would	 I	 be	 rebuffed
once	 I	 got	 near?’	 The	 Prince	 looked	 at	 me	 intently	 with	 a	 tired	 smile	 on	 his
lips.	I	stood	respectfully	a	few	feet	away.	My	son	looked	away	from	me,	as	if
my	 old	 and	 worn	 out	 form	 caused	 him	 shame.	 I	 was	 growing	 increasingly
ashamed	of	myself.	I	should	have	had	a	bath.	I	stank	of	liquor	and	decay.	The
prince	beckoned	but	I	stood	rooted	to	the	spot.	A	soldier	near	me	barked,	“You
oaf!	Don’t	you	see	his	Highness	is	calling	you?”
Nervously	I	moved	towards	the	chariot.	As	I	neared,	the	Prince	held	out
his	hand	to	me.	I	shrank	from	touching	the	royal	fingers,	but	in	a	swift	move,
he	 pulled	me	into	the	chariot.	A	gasp	went	through	the	crowd.	A	À,	th	lowly,
stinking	 beggar	 sharing	 a	 ride	 with	 the	 Asura	 Prince?	 I	 felt	 proud.	 Not	 once
had	his	father,	whom	I	had	dared	to	think	of	as	a	friend,	make	any	such	gesture.
Then	 I	 turned	 and	 saw	 the	 hatred	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 my	 foster	 son.	 I	 shared	 his
shame.	 The	 prince	 was	 scoring	 a	 political	 point	 by	 sharing	 his	 moment	 of
glory	with	a	lowly	person.	It	was	perhaps	a	noble	gesture	from	a	genuine	heart,
but	 I	 was	 so	 weighed	 down	 by	 my	 experiences	 in	 life	 that	 I	 could	 not	 bring
myself	 to	 think	 benevolently.	 Everything	 the	 rich	 and	 the	 mighty	 did,	 even	 in
charity,	 pity	 or	 generosity,	 smacked	 of	 selfishness.	 That	 was	 one	 of	 the	 hard
lessons	I	had	learnt	in	my	useless	life.	I	had	seen	pity	in	the	eyes	of	the	rich;	I

had	seen	pride	in	being	nice	to	people	like	me;	but	above	all,	I	had	seen	fear,
even	in	the	eyes	of	the	mighty	King	Ravana.	They	were	afraid	of	us,	the	docile,
animalistic,	 ignorant,	 black,	 poor	 men	 and	 women	 of	 the	 world.	 The	 pity,
patronization,	charity,	arrogance,	pride,	and	indifference,	were	all	part	of	the
defense	mechanism	of	the	rich	to	escape	their	fear.
Suddenly	I	felt	I	had	power	over	the	Asura	prince	–	power	of	the	mundane
over	 the	 spectacular.	 It	 was	 all	 very	 clear.	 He	 would	 wilt	 away	 like	 a	 halfblossomed	flower,	in	the	war,	still	in	his	youth,	but	I	would	live.	He	would	seep
through	 the	 gaps	 in	 the	 pages	 of	 legend	 and	 history,	 but	 I	 would	 be	 there
forever,	scraping	life	from	the	 streets,	fighting	my	little	everyday	battles.	No
poet	 would	 ever	 sing	 songs	 about	 me,	 but	 who	 cared	 about	 poets?	 No	 one
would	deify	me	like	a	God	but	Gods	were	useless	and	who	wanted	to	be	one?
This	war	would	end	soon	and	so	would	the	life	of	heroes	and	villains.	But	my
battle	would	continue,	and	millions	like	me	would	continue	to	wage	their	little
wars	 in	 the	 different	 corners	 of	 the	 earth,	 for	 food,	 water,	 air,	 shelter,	 and	 a
little	dignity.
I	was	still	lost	in	my	thoughts	when	the	Prince	said,	“Your	son	saved	my
life	today.	You	are	a	hero’s	father.	I	bow	to	you,	sir.”	I	felt	sick.	I	did	not	want
any	part	of	this.	I	was	angry	at	being	used	by	the	Prince	as	a	political	stunt.	Had
life	 made	 me	 so	 cynical	 that	 I	 suspected	 a	 truly	 noble	 Prince,	 one	 who	 had
shared	his	royal	chariot	with	a	stinking	tramp	like	me?	I	kept	quiet,	trying	to
hold	down	the	tears	filling	my	eyes.	I	tried	valiantly	to	control	the	trembling	of
my	lips,	but	I	broke	down	and	cried.	The	Prince	hugged	me	compassionately
and	kissed	my	cheeks.	My	son	looked	away.	I	kept	sobbing.	The	chariot	started
to	roll	and	the	soldiers	cheered	on	either	side.
As	the	fortress	gate	opened,	I	saw	the	King	and	the	Queen	standing	at	the
top	of	the	steps	that	led	to	the	palace.	The	balconies	brimmed	with	courtesans,
servants,	 and	 all	 those	 durbar	 creatures.	 They	 all	 cheered	 the	 Prince.	 The
setting	 sun	 painted	 the	 Emperor	 red	 and	 Ravana	 looked	 every	 bit	 the	 mighty
Asura	Emperor	he	was.	His	silver	mane	blew	in	the	breeze	and	he	stood	tall,
erect	and	proud,	as	he	welcomed	his	son	home.
It	 occurred	 to	 me	 then	 that	 this	 was	 a	 victory	 procession.	 ‘Was	 the	 war
over?’	 Ravana	 raised	 his	 hands	 and	 the	 crowd	 cheered.	 ‘Har	 Har	 Mahadev!’
ripped	through	the	air	and	electrified	every	Asura.	I	caught	a	jubilant	whisper
from	 the	 crowd	 that	 both	 the	 Deva	 princes	 were	 dead,	 slain	 by	 Meghanada.
Chendas	beat	furiously	and	flowers	were	showered	on	the	victorious	soldiers.
A	great	weight	fell	from	my	heart.	We	were	safe.	My	son	was	safe	and	alive.

The	 Asuras	 would	 not	 bear	 the	 yoke	 of	 Brahminism	 and	 casteism.
Untouchability,	 racial	 discrimination,	 and	 all	 the	 horrors	 associated	 with	 the
Deva	 culture,	 would	 remain	 as	 the	 exotic	 cultures	 of	 the	 semi-civilized	 north
Indians,	to	be	talked	about	in	jeering	tones	while	feÀtion,	aneling	smug	about
the	cultural	superiority	of	the	Asura	civilization.	Perhaps	the	Prince	was	indeed
noble	 if	 he	 had	 saved	 the	 Asuras	 from	 imminent	 disaster.	 This	 was	 the
beginning	of	a	new	era.	Rama	and	all	the	Vedic	atrocities	he	represented,	were
buried	in	the	sea.
And	my	son	was	a	part	of	the	victory.	He	was	the	hero	of	the	victory.	No
wonder	Meghanada	had	felt	obliged	to	take	me	into	his	chariot.	Actually,	as	the
hero’s	father,	I	should	have	been	accorded	much	more	respect.	As	the	chariot
came	to	a	stop	in	front	of	the	steps,	the	Emperor	came	running	down.	Before
the	proud	father	could	get	 near	his	son,	his	mother	ran	to	and	hug	 him	tight.
Meghanada’s	father	stood	a	few	feet	away,	irritated	that	he	could	not	hug	him
and	feel	the	strength	in	the	limbs	of	his	young	son.	Athikaya	stood	clumsily	a
few	 feet	 behind,	 a	 dark	 shadow	 of	 the	 fair	 Crown	 Prince,	 a	 stupid	 and
embarrassed	grin	on	his	plain	face.
Once	Mandodari	released	her	son,	father	and	son	eyed	each	other	stiffly.
After	 a	 few	 moments	 of	 tense	 silence,	 he	 hugged	 Meghanada	 tightly.	 The
crowd	 roared	 in	 approval	 and	 Chendas	 were	 beaten	 furiously.	 Then	 they
moved	into	the	palace.	Like	a	dog	behind	its	master,	my	son	followed	them	in.
Not	 a	 word,	 not	 even	 an	 acknowledgement	 that	 I	 was	 here.	 I	 stood	 there
stunned.	The	crowd	beneath	started	their	revelries.	I	did	not	know	what	to	do.
After	a	while	a	guard	tapped	my	shoulder.	“From	the	Prince.”	he	said,	offering
me	a	suspicious	looking	bundle.	Tentatively	I	opened	the	cloth.	There	were	odd
things.	Some	used	clothes	–	silk,	but	used	–	a	few	copper	utensils,	some	sweets.
Here	 was	 my	 reward	 for	 having	 fostered	 a	 hero	 –	 sent	 with	 love	 from	 the
Asura	 Prince	 Meghanada,	 the	 vanquisher	 of	 Indra.	 This	 was	 the	 price	 the
Prince	had	put	on	his	own	life.	The	guard	watched	me	with	envy	and	feigned
indifference.	 He	 waited	 for	 his	 baksheesh.	 ‘This	 country	 will	 never	 change.
Grab	everything	whenever	you	can	–	that’s	the	mantra.’	Greed	was	the	basis	of
this	rotten	country.
Without	 speaking,	 I	 stood	 with	 the	 reward	 dumped	 on	 me	 by	 the
government.	The	courier	and	faithful	government	servant,	was	determined	to
get	something	out	of	me.	Disgusted,	I	dropped	the	entire	reward	into	his	hands
and	 walked	 away.	 Without	 batting	 an	 eyelid,	 the	 guard	 took	 the	 bundle	 and

walked	into	the	palace.	I	joined	the	sea	of	revelers	celebrating	Rama’s	death.

52	A	prime	minister’s	mission
Ravana
Finally,	 it	 was	 over.	 My	 son	 had	 vanquished	 our	 greatest	 foes.	 I	 was	 so
proud	of	him.	But	I	was	also	worried.	Something	was	wrong.	He	and	his	friend
Athikaya,	 had	 managed	 to	 cut	 off	 Rama	 and	 Lakshmana	 from	 their	 generals,
and	 trapped	 the	 Deva	 princes	 in	 deadly	 hand-to-hand	 combat.	 Prahastha	 had
landed	 half	 his	 troops	 on	 the	 eastern	 side	 of	 the	 island	 the	 previous	 day,	 and
had	made	them	trek	for	the	whole	night	to	attack	the	Deva	army	from	the	rear.
He	had	managed	to	draw	Hanuman	and	Sugreeva	from	their	masters	and	give
them	 the	 impression	 that	 the	 Asura	 army	 was	 in	 retreat.	 Encouraged,	 the
monkey-men	had	pursued	the	Asuras,	and	when	they	were	sufficiently	far	away
from	Rama,	the	Asuras	had	turned	back	in	deadly	combat.	I	watched	the	battle
from	my	citadel	and	was	impressed	by	Prahastha’s	generalship.
Rama	 was	 left	 with	 only	 a	 few	 guards	 and	 was	 soon	 outnumbered	 by
Meghanada	and	Athikaya.	They	hacked	their	way	through	Rama’s	determined
and	 desperate	 army.	 They	 didn’t	 have	 much	 time	 and	 Meghanada	 went	 in	 for
the	 kill.	 The	 Deva	 princes	 were	 quick	 and	 accurate	 with	 their	 arrows	 and
woundƀs	 deteed	 my	 son	 and	 his	 servant	 many	 times.	 It	 was	 Athikaya	 who
suggested	that	they	get	close	to	the	Princes	as	quickly	as	possible	so	they	would
lose	the	advantage	of	their	arrows.
Meghanada	 and	 Athikaya	 abandoned	 their	 chariot	 and	 rushed	 forward
with	 drawn	 swords.	 They	 zigzagged	 through	 the	 fighting	 clump	 of	 men,	 and
suddenly	 descended	upon	the	 Deva	princes.	It	was	a	sign	of	how	quick	Rama
was	with	his	arrows;	that	is,	in	a	split	moment,	he	had	half	drawn	his	bow	and
managed	 to	 land	 an	 arrow	 on	 Meghanada’s	 shoulder.	 With	 one	 sweep	 of	 his
sword,	 Meghanada	 hacked	 Rama	 down,	 while	 Athikaya	 struggled	 in	 mortal
combat	 with	 the	 younger	 Deva	 prince.	 Lakshmana	 abandoned	 his	 bow	 and

arrows	 and	 drew	 his	 sword.	 The	 Deva	 sword	 is	 a	 deadly	 weapon.	 Unlike	 the
curved,	 heavy,	 iron	 sword	 the	 Asuras	 used,	 the	 Deva	 sword	 was	 a	 long,	 thin
blade	that	was	used	like	a	dagger.	Meghanada	rushed	to	Athikaya’s	aid	but	as	he
turned,	 Rama,	 whom	 he	 had	 thought	 was	 dead,	 caught	 hold	 of	 his	 leg	 and
tripped	him	up.	In	the	split	moment	that	Athikaya	turned	to	look	at	his	master,
Lakshmana	thrust	his	sword	into	Athikaya.
Lakshmana	turned	swiftly	and	with	his	sword	raised	high	with	both	hands,
he	went	for	the	heart	of	my	son	who	lay	face	down	on	the	ground.	It	was	then
that	 Athikaya,	 who	 was	 on	 his	 knees,	 moved	 and	 dragged	 Meghanada	 away.
Lakshmana’s	sword	narrowly	missed	the	Asura	prince	and	plunged	deep	into
the	soil.	Meghanada	thrust	his	sword	deep	into	Lakshmana’s	abdomen	and	he
saw	the	younger	Deva	prince	roll	over,	writhe	in	pain	and	then	go	still.
By	this	time,	the	old	general	of	the	Vanaras,	had	descended	upon	the	small
band	of	the	Asura	army	from	the	hill	he	had	been	hiding	in.	From	a	height	on
the	hill,	the	wily	old	general	had	watched	the	progress	of	the	battle	and	directed
its	course	when	he	saw	Prahastha’s	ploy.	He	rushed	in	with	his	band	of	men,	to
aid	 Rama.	 Sensing	 danger,	 Athikaya	 urged	 Meghanada	 to	 retreat,	 but
Meghanada	had	lost	consciousness	by	then.	Athikaya	carried	the	prince	on	his
shoulders,	though	he	himself	was	bleeding	profusely.	He	hacked	his	way	back
to	 the	 chariot	 and	 tried	 to	 revive	 the	 Asura	 prince.	 He	 could	 see	 Jambavan’s
men	closing	in
Jambavan	had	sent	a	message	to	Sugreeva	and	Hanuman	to	return	to	aid
their	leader.	As	one	body,	the	entire	Vanara	army	turned	and	charged	back	to
close	off	Meghanada’s	retreat.	Prahastha’s	army	in	the	rear	gave	chase.	I	could
see	 that	 my	 son	 was	 trapped,	 though	 I	 was	 unaware	 that	 he	 had	 lost
consciousness.	From	my	citadel	I	could	only	see	the	flag	flying	on	his	chariot.
I	worried	when	I	saw	the	chariot	in	the	middle	of	the	battleground.	‘How	could
the	boy	be	so	reckless	as	to	abandon	his	chariot	and	go	after	the	enemy	in	hand
to	hand	combat?’	That	was	not	the	way	seasoned	warriors	fought.	It	wasn’t	just
dangerous,	but	foolish	too.	But	boys	will	be	boys	and	finally,	through	reckless
bravery	 and	 luck,	 he	 vanquished	 the	 evil	 forces.	 It	 was	 then	 that	 Athikaya
shouted	at	top	of	his	voice,	“Rama	and	Lakshmana	are	dead.	Victory	to	Prince
Meghanada.”	 Victorious	 cries	 rang	 through	 the	 Asura	 ranks.	 I	 could	 faintly
hear	 what	 was	 happening,	 but	 my	 war	 hardened	 eyes	 noticed	 the	 way	 the
Vanara	armies	charged.	Imperceptibly	they	slowed	down	and	that	was	enough
for	the	Asuras.	Jambavan	tried	to	assemble	his	forces,	shouting	over	and	over
again	that	it	was	an	Asura	ploy.	But	the	news	spread	fast.

For	 the	 Vanaras	 it	 was	 unbelievable.	 Rama	 was	 a	 God	 to	 them,	 an
invincible	force	of	nature,	and	it	was	inconceivable	that	he	had	been	slain	by	an
ordinary	 Asura	 prince.	 The	 column	 led	 by	 Hanuman	 slowed	 down
considerably	 and	 Prahastha’s	 men	 caught	 up	 with	 them	 to	 engage	 in	 combat.
Athikaya’s	 men	 dashed	 out	 of	 the	 confusion	 towards	 the	 fort.	 By	 this	 time
Meghanada	 had	 regained	 consciousness.	 He	 too	 cried	 out	 that	 he	 had	 killed
Rama.	 The	 morale	 in	 Rama’s	 army	 sank	 further.	 For	 alˀthe	 confusl	 practical
purposes,	the	war	was	over.	 I	saw	 Prahastha’s	 forces	 round	up	 the	remaining
Vanaras.	 But	 Jambavan	 tried	 to	 reach	 the	 place	 where	 the	 bodies	 of	 the	 Deva
princes	had	fallen.
I	 was	 enraged	 to	 see	 my	 brother	 Vibhishana	 rushing	 towards	 the	 slain
Deva	princes.	The	scum	that	he	was,	he	would	be	on	all	fours	licking	my	feet,
once	 he	 was	 sure	 the	 Asuras	 had	 won.	 I	 saw	 Jambavan’s	 men	 lift	 the	 limp
bodies	 of	 the	 Deva	 princes.	 ‘Something	 was	 wrong.	 Something	 was	 seriously
wrong.’	 I	 could	 see	 it	 in	 the	 way	 the	 Vanaras	 changed.	 With	 the	 bodies	 of	 the
princes	 in	 the	 chariot,	 the	 wily	 Vanara	 general	 turned	 his	 army	 and	 dashed
towards	 the	 sea.	 Prahastha	 tried	 to	 follow,	 but	 was	 vigorously	 held	 back	 by
Sugreeva	and	Hanuman.	I	saw	a	boat	approach	the	beach	and	the	bodies	of	the
Deva	princes	being	laid	into	it.
By	then,	Meghanada’s	victory	procession	had	reached	the	fort	gates	and
my	 worried	 wife	 rushed	 out.	 She	 nagged	 me	 to	 come	 and	 receive	 her
victorious	son.	But	my	eyes	remained	glued	to	the	unfolding	drama	in	the	sea.
The	 boat	 rowed	 away	 furiously	 towards	 one	 of	 the	 small	 uninhabited	 islands
that	dotted	the	north-western	sea	towards	the	mainland.	As	soon	as	the	boat	was
at	a	safe	distance,	Hanuman’s	column	fled	towards	the	sea	over	Rama’s	bridge.
Prahastha	 was	 in	 hot	 pursuit	 when	 suddenly	 Varuna’s	 army	 appeared	 to	 his
rear.	 This	 was	 a	 ploy	 to	 allow	 the	 monkey-men	 to	 escape.	 Hanuman’s	 men
crossed	the	bridge	and	destroyed	the	connection	with	the	island.
With	 the	 news	 spreading	 that	 Meghanada	 had	 slain	 the	 enemy	 chief,	 the
Asura	army	assembled	and	the	celebrations	began.	There	was	the	small	matter
of	 finishing	 off	 or	 conquering	 what	 was	 left	 of	 Rama’s	 army,	 but	 that	 could
wait	until	tomorrow.	Prahastha	tried	to	rein	in	his	indisciplined	Asura	soldiers,
who	had	rushed	back	to	the	fort	to	celebrate	the	victory.	But	something	nagged
at	me	and	 I	 anxiously	waited	for	Prahastha	to	report	back.	I	was	happy	about
our	 victory,	 but	 I	 was	 also	 worried	 by	 the	 way	 Jambavan	 had	 carried	 the
princes.	‘Were	they	really	dead?’	They	were	seriously	injured,	I	knew	that	for
sure.	 I	 was	 irritated	 that	 Meghanada	 had	 not	 cut	 off	 Rama	 and	 Lakshmana’s

heads.	The	boy	had	been	under	tremendous	pressure	and	had	fought	valiantly,
but	it	was	little	details	like	that	which	changed	the	course	of	battles.	Meghanada
should	never	have	assumed	the	enemy	was	dead	from	a	few	sword	thrusts	or
some	arrows.	But	only	a	miracle	could	get	the	vanquished	back	to	life	once	his
head	had	been	severed.	That	was	a	lesson	I	learnt	a	long	time	ago	in	the	dense
forests,	under	Mahabali	and	Brahma.
Had	I	had	such	an	opportunity	in	my	younger	days,	I	would	have	severed
the	heads	of	Rama	and	Lakshmana	and	raised	them	on	poles	for	his	men	to	see.
The	moment	you	get	the	chief,	the	war	ends.	It	kills	the	morale	of	the	warriors.
I	have	seen	it	in	the	many	campaigns	of	my	youth.	I	had	been	in	grave	danger
of	 being	 hacked	 to	 death,	 when	 many	 a	 time	 I	 had	 recklessly	 charged	 at	 the
enemy	 chiefs	 with	 my	 Chandrahasa	 and	 somehow	 killed	 the	 enemy	 chief.	 No
matter	 how	 many	 foes	 surrounded	 me	 and	 how	 close	 I	 was	 to	 death,	 the
moment	I	cut	off	the	head	of	their	chief	and	make	sure	all	of	them	saw	it,	the
battle	 was	 over.	 The	 fool	 that	 Meghanada	 was,	 he	 did	 not	 ensure	 that	 Rama’s
and	 Lakshmana’s	 heads	 were	 chopped	 off.	 That	 was	 a	 tactical	 error.
Meghanada	 still	 lacked	 something	 that	 only	 the	 big	 league	 of	 great	 warriors
had.	Was	it	ruthlessness?	The	boy	was	too	soft	at	heart	to	be	a	real	warrior.	I
would	have	done	the	deed	without	batting	an	eyelid.	So	would	have	Bali,	Rama,
Hanuman,	Prahastha,	Rudraka	or	Mahabali.
That	meant	that	the	enemy	was	not	yet	dead.	There	must	have	been	life	left
in	 Rama	 and	 Lakshmana	 or	 why	 would	 Jambavan	 have	 ferried	 them	 to	 the
island?	The	enemy	could	still	strikeˀfe	left.	‘Foolish	Meghanada.’	The	boy	had
not	seen	the	harshness	of	life,	he	took	for	granted	the	things	I	had	built	with	my
sweat	and	blood.	He	had	yet	to	feel	the	utter	helplessness	of	not	knowing	when
or	 if	 the	 next	 meal	 would	 come.	 He	 has	 not	 seen	 the	 sorrow	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 a
mother	who	could	not	feed	her	children.	I	blamed	Mandodari.	She	doted	on	her
son	 like	 he	 was	 the	 only	 precious	 thing	 in	 the	 world.	 He	 was	 so	 handsome,
loving	 and	 compassionate,	 that	 one	 could	 not	 help	 adoring	 the	 rascal.	 But,	 I
should	 have	 brought	 him	 up	 better.	 A	 golden	 opportunity	 had	 been	 frittered
away	in	battle.	Fool!
I	 went	 in,	 wanting	 to	 grill	 him	 for	 his	 stupidity.	 He	 smiled	 at	 me	 with
glowing	pride.	I	waited	for	some	time	as	I	wished	to	get	him	alone.	The	other
fool,	Athikaya,	was	sitting	on	the	floor	like	a	happy	mongrel.	I	wanted	to	bash
the	heads	of	both	together,	for	what	they	had	done.	There	they	sat	like	heroes
after	missing	the	best	chance	the	Asuras	could	have	ever	hoped	for.
“Ravana,	see	how	his	body	has	been	cut,	my	boy	could	have	been	killed.”

Mandodari	 sobbed	 and	 showed	 me	 the	 various	 cuts	 and	 injuries.	 Meghanada
was	actually	enjoying	all	the	attention.	‘What	did	she	expect?	He	had	gone	into
battle.	This	was	war.	Why	was	the	woman	fussing	over	him?’	Then	it	struck	me.
Mandodari	was	seeing	war	for	the	first	time.	All	my	other	campaigns	had	been
fought	 in	 faraway	 lands.	 I	 had	 worried	 when	 I	 sent	 him	 alone	 to	 fight,	 for	 I
knew	 the	 horrors	 that	 could	 happen	 in	 the	 fraction	 of	 a	 second	 on	 the
battlefield.	I	agonised	about	the	stray	arrow	that	could	land	in	his	eye	and	pop
his	 brains	 out.	 If	 women	 saw	 the	 battlefields	 where	 foolish	 men	 slaughtered
each	 other,	 there	 would	 have	 been	 no	 wars	 in	 this	 world.	 I	 did	 not	 have	 the
heart	to	break	into	this	scene	so	I	went	out	of	the	room.	Prahastha	came	to	me
and	bowed.	I	clasped	his	hands	and	led	him	towards	the	balcony.
“What	do	you	think?	Did	Rama	die?”	I	asked,	knowing	the	answer	well.
He	shook	his	head.
“The	boys	botched	it	up,	I	think.”	I	said,	and	he	smiled	sadly.
“We	cannot	blame	them.	Meghanada	is	too	inexperienced	and	soft,	but	this
could	 turn	 out	 to	 cost	 us	 high.”	 Prahastha	 avoided	 my	 eyes.	 I	 could	 feel	 the
frustration	in	him.	“He	should	be	stopped.”	Prahastha	said,	concentrating	hard
on	 the	 distant	 island	 where	 Jambavan	 had	 retreated	 with	 his	 injured	 leader.	 I
looked	at	him	confused.
“Your	Highness,	the	information	I	got	was	that	both	the	princes	are	on	the
verge	 of	 death,	 but	 the	 Vanaras	 medical	 knowledge	 is	 legendary.	 They	 know
how	to	extract	life-saving	juices	from	the	most	unlikely	plants.	They	do	not	use
chemical	 powders	 like	 we	 do.	 Instead,	 they	 use	 a	 system	 of	 medicine	 called
Ayurveda,	where	the	thrust	is	on	plants.”
“What	do	you	suggest?”
“We	are	unsure	if	Rama	is	alive	or	not.	He	was	gravely	injured	and	could
even	be	dead	by	now.	But	if	he	is	alive,	or	if	the	Vanara	doctors	have	somehow
miraculously	 saved	 him,	 they	 will	 need	 to	 brew	 their	 medicines.	 The	 kind	 of
plants	they	use	are	usually	found	only	in	three	areas	of	India	–	in	Lanka,	on	the
tropical,	 south-western	 coasts	 of	 the	 mainland,	 and	 in	 the	 Himalayas.	 The
Himalayas	are	too	far.	They	cannot	enter	Lanka	as	it	would	be	too	dangerous,
but	they	might	try	and	we	have	to	be	alert	to	such	a	possibility.	The	only	option
left	 is	 for	 them	 to	 go	 to	 the	 west	 coast	 of	 the	 mainland.	 The	 Vanaras	 will
explore	both	options	urgently.”
“Why	 don’t	 we	 attack	 and	 take	 the	 island	 tonight?”	 I	 was	 not	 confident
about	this	option,	but	I	sounded	out	the	idea	with	Prahastha.
“No.	Varuna’s	fleet	is	standing	guard.	It	is	too	risky.	What	we	caˀahan	do

is	hope	that	Rama	and	Lakshmana	die.	Then	we	can	cheaply	buy	off	the	greedy
Vanara	 King,	 Sugreeva.	 Meanwhile,	 our	 island	 security	 also	 has	 to	 be
strengthened.	 It	 could	 be	 Angada	 who	 attempts	 to	 get	 into	 Lanka.	 Your
Highness,	we	should	alert	Lankini,	immediately”
Lankini	 was	 the	 Asura	 governor	 located	 at	 the	 southern	 tip	 of	 the
mainland,	where	the	three	oceans	met.	She	had	ruled	the	southern	provinces	of
the	mainland	with	a	just	and	iron	hand.	Though	she	was	under	my	suzerainty,	I
had	stopped	my	annual	visits	as	she	never	defaulted	in	sending	huge	sums	of
money	for	my	protection.	She	should	have	assisted	me	in	attacking	Rama	from
the	rear,	but	like	any	good	sovereign	under	my	imperial	thumb,	she	sat	on	the
fence	to	see	how	things	would	work	out	and	then	align	with	the	winner.	I	had
sent	 many	 messages	 to	 her	 for	 reinforcements,	 but	 the	 letters	 remained
unanswered.	I	was	bitter,	but	also	knew	that	this	was	life.
“How	 will	 we	 inform	 Lankini?”	 I	 grew	 more	 and	 more	 apprehensive
about	 the	 whole	 scheme,	 but	 somehow,	 what	 Prahastha	 said,	 made	 sense.	 I
considered	launching	an	attack	on	the	Vanaras	who	had	withdrawn	to	the	island
and	 weighed	 the	 options.	 But	 that	 would	 be	 a	 reckless	 venture,	 tempting	 fate
rather	too	far.	No,	the	best	bet	was	to	ensure	that	Rama	died.	I	felt	a	pang	of	pity
for	my	daughter,	but	brushed	it	aside	hastily.
“We	 have	 to	 move	 quickly.	 I’ll	 take	 one	 of	 the	 snake	 boats	 and	 go
myself,”	 Prahastha	 talked	 to	 himself	 rather	 than	 to	 me.	 Snake	 boats	 had	 been
exclusively	used	by	Mahabali’s	navy	when	he	had	ruled	from	the	west	coast	of
the	 mainland.	 They	 were	 long	 and	 sleek	 and	 needed	 more	 than	 120	 oarsmen
each.	They	were	ideal	in	the	lagoons	that	dotted	the	west	coast,	but	were	rarely
used	in	the	open	sea.	But	they	were	the	fastest	possible	way	to	travel,	other	than
the	Pushpaka.
“Your	 Highness,	 I’ll	 undertake	 the	 mission	 myself.	 I	 have	 to	 sneak	 past
Varuna’s	 fleet	 and	 reach	 the	 mainland	 by	 dawn.	 It	 is	 dangerous	 and	 given	 a
choice,	I	would	have	avoided	it.	But	no	one	knows	the	waters	better	than	I	do.
I’m	sure	the	Vanaras	will	not	attempt	an	attack	until	their	princes	recover.	I	will
start	now.	And	it	would	be	a	good	idea	to	give	the	command	to	Kumbakarna.”
Bowing,	 he	 left	 before	 I	 could	 stop	 him.	 ‘Give	 my	 brother	 command?’
That	was	easier	said	than	done.	My	younger	brother	has	been	lying	drunk	for
many	days.	His	addiction	to	drugs	and	alcohol	had	become	habitual	and	I	could
see	 him	 wasting	 away	 and	 disintegrating	 before	 my	 eyes.	 Was	 it	 because	 I
sensed	a	rival	in	him	that	I	had	not	made	enough	of	an	effort	to	wean	him	away

from	his	bad	habits?	I	do	not	know.	I	had	not	even	thought	about	him	for	many
days.	I	hadn’t	for	a	moment	thought	of	Maricha.	I	had	not	even	spared	a	though
for	Akshaya	Kumara,	my	little	boy	who	had	been	murdered	by	Hanuman.	And
now,	when	I	was	so	short	of	good	men	to	take	command,	Prahastha	reminded
me	of	my	brother.	I	had	to	find	him	in	one	of	the	dark	holes	of	the	palace	and
pull	him	from	his	dark	world	of	happiness	to	fight	my	war.	It	wasn’t	going	to
be	easy.

53	Violation
Bhadra
It	 was	 in	 those	 moments	 just	 before	 the	 dawn,	 when	 the	 darkness	 is	 so
thick	 that	 you	 feel	 it	 sticking	 to	 your	 skin,	 that	 I	 heard	 footsteps.	 My	 animal
instincts	had	not	weakened	with	age.	My	ears	picked	up	the	sounds	of	danger
even	 though	 I	 was	 as	 drunk	 as	 a	 hog.	 I	 did	 not	 dare	 raise	 my	 head,	 but
somebody	 was	 moving	 silently	 and	 that	 meant	 trouble.	 I	 listened	 intently	 for
any	sound.	The	last	of	the	oil	lamps	had	died	long	ago.	The	sky	was	overcast
and	there	was	bu	no	sound	other	than	the	intermittent	cries	of	a	night	fowl.	I
listened,	afraid	to	even	breathe.
This	 time	 it	 was	 unmistakable.	 There	 were	 many	 of	 them.	 I	 could	 sense
their	presence	in	the	night.	They	were	on	the	treetops,	slowly	treading	over	the
hundreds	of	snoring	Asura	soldiers.	I	slowly	opened	my	eyes.	I	could	see	the
limp	figures	of	the	Asura	guards	at	the	palace	door.	I	heard	a	rustle	in	the	trees
close	 to	 the	 first	 floor	 balcony	 and	 some	 dark	 figures	 jumped	 onto	 the
verandah	with	graceful	ease.	It	could	only	be	the	Vanaras.
A	chill	went	down	my	spine.	‘Why	are	they	here?’	The	guards	were	drunk
from	 yesterday’s	 victory	 party	 and	 had	 passed	 out.	 Slowly	 I	 crawled	 towards
the	palace	on	all	fours.	I	feared	the	worst.	As	I	reached	the	doors,	I	could	see
the	 guards	 had	 been	 killed,	 their	 throats	 slit	 open.	 The	 enemy	 was	 inside.
Should	 I	 shout	 and	 make	 a	 noise?	 But	 would	 anyone	 wake	 up?	 I	 had	 to	 warn
Ravana.	 I	 knew	 where	 the	 royal	 chambers	 were.	 But	 I	 was	 afraid.	 The	 enemy
could	 have	 been	 anywhere.	 In	 the	 dark	 shadows	 of	 the	 palace,	 death	 was
waiting	to	pounce	on	me.	I	had	always	believed	that	I	was	ready	to	die.	If	I	died,
nobody	would	bother,	perhaps	not	even	my	wife,	certainly	not	my	son.	Still	I
wanted	to	live.	I	knew	what	was	at	stake	if	Ravana	lost.	My	people	would	die	a
thousand	deaths	all	their	lives	at	the	hands	of	the	Brahmins.	I	pushed	my	tired

body,	trembling	at	the	slightest	sound,	afraid	even	to	breath,	to	the	first	floor
where	I	knew	Ravana	slept.	That	is,	if	he	was	not	already	dead.	I	wished	I	had
more	strength	in	my	body	and	that	I	was	young	and	daring	again.
I	 climbed	 up	 the	 stairs	 on	 tiptoe,	 avoiding	 the	 slightest	 sound.	 I	 heard	 a
muffled	 cry	 and	 then	 a	 thud	 and	 the	 noise	 of	 something	 being	 dragged.	 With
my	 heart	 pounding,	 I	 peeped	 from	 the	 stairs	 and	 saw	 a	 few	 Vanaras	 scamper
away.	 I	 recognized	 their	 evil	 prince,	 Angada.	 He	 carried	 a	 limp	 form	 on	 his
shoulder	and	was	running	from	the	room.	Some	of	the	guards	who	were	still
sober	 had	 finally	 woken	 up	 and	 tried	 to	 stop	 Angada.	 He	 did	 not	 even	 break
stride,	 just	 thrust	 and	 hacked	 his	 way	 through	 the	 stunned	 guards	 with	 his
sword.	 I	 rushed	 to	 the	 entrance	 of	 the	 royal	 chamber	 and	 found	 the	 guards
lying	 in	 pools	 of	 blood.	 The	 guards	 who	 had	 dared	 to	 confront	 the	 Vanara
prince	 were	 dead	 or	 writhing	 in	 pain	 with	 their	 guts	 spilled	 out	 and	 blood
spurting	all	over	the	beautiful	carpets.
I	 looked	 at	 the	 swinging	 doors	 of	 the	 chamber	 and	 hesitated	 for	 a	 few
seconds.	Then	bracing	myself	to	see	the	Emperor	with	a	dagger	stuck	into	his
heart,	 I	 pushed	 open	 the	 door.	 The	 chamber	 was	 empty.	 There	 were	 no	 dead
bodies	 anywhere.	 Only	 the	 bed	 looked	 as	 if	 it	 had	 witnessed	 some	 struggle.
Then	 it	 occurred	 to	 me.	 ‘Angada	 had	 carried	 away	 Mandodari,	 the	 Asura
Queen.	 He	 had	 come	 with	 murder	 in	 mind	 but	 not	 finding	 the	 Emperor	 in	 his
chamber,	 had	 kidnapped	 his	 wife	 instead.	 Ravana	 had	 to	 be	 informed.	 Where
was	 he?’	 I	 ran	 through	 the	 corridors	 of	 the	 palace,	 banging	 on	 doors	 and
crying	loudly,	calling	for	Athikaya.	Many	people	woke	up	and	I	shouted	at	the
top	of	my	voice	that	the	Queen	had	been	kidnapped	by	Angada.	Initially	there
was	no	reaction.	No	doubt	many	thought	I	was	blabbering	after	having	had	too
much	liquor.	Then	the	panic	started.	The	guards	woke	and	ran	here	and	there
like	 headless	 chickens.	 Many	 wailed	 loudly,	 some	 shouting	 orders,	 but	 there
was	no	one	to	obey	them,	and	others	sat	blinking	and	not	understanding	what
the	ruckus	was	all	about.
It	 was	 almost	 half	 an	 hour	 before	 I	 located	 Meghanada	 and	 Athikaya.	 I
kicked	 my	 son	 awake	 and	 he	 jumped	 up	 from	 his	 drunken	 stupor.	 Anybody
could	have	come	in	and	murdered	the	Asura	Prince	and	his	servant.	So	much
for	 Asura	 security.	 If	 someone	 wanted	 one	 reason	 for	 the	 downfall	 of	 the
mighty	Asuras,	it	could	be	summed	up	in	the	word,	liqӀumped	upuor.	It	was	the
bane	of	my	race.	The	Prince	came	to	his	senses	quickly	and	by	the	time	I	had
explained	what	had	happened,	he	was	alert.	He	jumped	up,	drew	his	sword	and
ran	 out.	 I	 followed	 the	 Prince,	 shouting	 what	 I	 had	 seen.	 Athikaya	 caught	 up

with	us	when	we	crossed	 the	front	courtyard	and	Meghanada	ran	towards	 the
fort	bell.	Meghanada	took	the	stairs	at	the	double.	I	was	exhausted	and	did	not
follow	 him	 up.	 Athikaya	 darted	 past	 me,	 trying	 to	 catch	 up	 with	 the	 Prince.
Soon	the	entire	fort	rang	with	the	continuous	peels	of	the	huge	fort	bell.	‘Why
hadn’t	I	thought	of	that	myself?’	Within	minutes,	the	entire	courtyard	was	full
of	alert	guards.
“What	 is	 going	 on?”	 The	 loud	 voice	 of	 Ravana	 boomed	 across	 the
courtyard	as	the	Emperor	rushed	towards	the	bell	tower.	Meghanada	explained
what	had	happened	and	Ravana’s	face	went	white.	Then	the	colour	rushed	back.
His	anger	was	back	as	he	slammed	his	fist	on	the	bell	tower	wall,	sending	dust
and	plaster	flying.	“Catch	that	bastard	Angada	and	bring	him	to	me.”
“Father,	I	will	lead	the	search.	This	could	be	a	trap	and	you	should	remain
in	the	palace.	If	the	Vanaras	attack	when	the	fort	is	left	without	a	leader,	we	will
be	in	deep	trouble.”
“You	remain	here	Meghanada.	It	is	my	wife	they	have	dared	to	kidnap.	I
will	lead	the	search	party	and	teach	those	bastards	a	lesson.	And	I	think	the	time
has	come	to	wake	up	Kumbha.	I	need	him	desperately.	I	have	been	trying	to	put
some	sense	into	that	oaf’s	thick	head	the	whole	night.”
Ravana	 mounted	 his	 favourite	 horse	 and	 plunged	 into	 the	 darkness.	 The
search	party,	with	hundreds	of	soldiers	carrying	flaming	torches,	struggled	to
keep	 pace	 with	 the	 galloping	 Asura	 Emperor.	 Soldiers	 ran	 behind	 the	 horses
with	 their	 spears	 and	 clubs,	 making	 a	 lot	 of	 noise,	 but	 generally	 useless	 for
anything	other	than	making	a	nuisance	of	themselves.	I	joined	them.
By	the	time	we	reached	the	edge	of	the	Subela	hills,	the	horses	had	been
abandoned	and	the	search	parties	were	almost	a	quarter	of	the	way	up	the	steep
hills.	 The	 thick,	 dark	 jungle	 of	 Subela	 with	 its	 huge,	 overhanging	 boulders,
loomed	large	and	formidable.	I	was	not	sure	my	tired,	old	body	could	take	the
rigours	of	the	climb.	But	curiosity	is	a	great	motivator	and	I	dragged	my	body
up,	 panting	 and	 puffing,	 to	 catch	 up	 with	 the	 young	 guards	 who	 had
enthusiastically	followed	the	path	made	by	the	official	search	party.
Only	the	occasional	flicker	of	torches	through	the	thick	foliage	guided	us.
Twice	I	tripped	and	fell,	but	ignoring	the	pain,	and	suppressing	my	fear	of	the
poisonous	 snakes	 that	 abounded	 in	 these	 forests,	 I	 tried	 hard	 to	 keep	 up	 with
men	 twenty-five	 years	 younger	 than	 me.	 I	 found	 I	 was	 stronger	 than	 I	 had
believed.	The	memories	of	such	adventures	I	had	been	a	part	of,	with	the	same
man	 who	 was	 now	 the	 Emperor;	 when	 both	 of	 us	 were	 younger;	 the	 heady
feeling	 of	 daredevilry	 and	 courage;	 the	 youthful	 thrill	 of	 facing	 danger	 with

ease;	came	flooding	back	to	me	and	I	felt	many	years	younger	than	at	the	start
of	the	chase.
We	 were	 all	 perspiring	 copiously	 and	 panting	 hard	 by	 the	 time	 we
reached	the	small	clearing,	hundreds	of	feet	below	the	peak.	We	could	see	the
earlier	 search	 parties	 huddled	 together	 in	 the	 distance.	 The	 eastern	 sky	 had	 a
streak	of	grey	and	the	stars	had	grown	dimmer.	Many	of	the	torches	had	died
down.	I	sat	down	to	catch	my	breath	as	the	younger	ones	in	my	group	rushed	to
their	friends	at	the	edge	of	the	clearing.	Then	slowly	I	dragged	myself	uphill.
I	pushed	my	way	through	the	crowd.	There,	lying	on	the	bare	earth,	was
the	Queen,	naked	 and	unconscious.	Ravana	stood,	stunned,	weeping	silently.	I
stepped	forward	and	taking	off	my	tattered	shawl,	covered	the	naked	body	of
the	 Queen	 of	 the	 Asuras.	 My	 hands	 brushed	 against	 her	 breasts	 and	 she
stirred.Ӏng	sil	Slowly	she	opened	her	eyes.	Ravana	caught	her	in	his	arms	and
hugged	 her.	 She	 looked	 at	 the	 crowd	 gawking	 at	 her	 for	 a	 moment,	 without
comprehension.	Then	her	nudity,	her	shame,	the	violation,	dawned	on	her.	She
let	 out	 an	 animal	 cry	 and	 tried	 to	 cover	 herself	 in	 my	 stinking	 shawl.	 She
scrambled	up	and	tried	to	run.	With	a	jerk,	Ravana	caught	her	arm	and	hugged
her	tightly.	She	buried	her	face	in	his	shoulder	and	wept.	The	crowd	reluctantly
moved	away.	Some	ran	to	fetch	water,	others	collected	some	clothes	for	their
Queen,	and	some	put	together	a	makeshift	stretcher	to	carry	the	Queen	back.	I
stood	 nearby,	 wondering	 at	 the	 twist	 of	 fate.	 She	 repeatedly	 said	 she	 did	 not
wish	to	continue	living	with	this	shame.	Angada	and	his	boors	had	violated	her
when	they	realized	that	she	was	not	Sita,	as	they	had	at	first	thought.	She	did	not
want	to	remain	Ravana’s	wife	anymore;	she	wanted	to	die.
Ravana	did	not	speak	at	all	except	to	say	that	she	was	his	lawfully	wedded
wife	and	that	she	would	remain	so.	It	was	embarrassing	to	witness	his	intensely
private	pain.	But	I	felt	a	growing	admiration	for	the	man	who	thus	stood	by	his
wife	 in	 her	 trial.	 As	 a	 ruler,	 nothing	 worse	 could	 have	 happened	 to	 him,	 not
even	 his	 own	 death.	 The	 Queen	 was	 forever	 tainted	 and	 the	 easiest	 thing	 for
him	would	have	been	to	fling	her	away	like	a	used	rag.	But	he	chose	the	tough
way,	 to	 live	 with	 snickering	 subordinates	 who	 would	 make	 lewd	 comments
about	his	wife	the	moment	his	back	was	turned.	Perhaps,	in	such	choices	lay	his
greatness	 and	 also	 his	 weakness.	 At	 the	 time,	 I	 doubt	 whether	 I	 completely
appreciated	 his	 gesture	 towards	 his	 violated	 Queen.	 It	 was	 later,	 much	 later,
when	 I	 witnessed	 the	 behaviour	 of	 another	 man	 towards	 his	 chosen	 wife,	 in
circumstance	that	were	much	less	serious,	that	I	understood	why	Ravana	would
never	be	deified.	He	was	too	humane	to	be	a	God.

I	wanted	to	slip	away	silently,	but	Ravana	saw	me	moving	away.	“Bhadra,”
he	called	and	I	stopped	to	turn	back.	I	could	see	he	was	both	embarrassed	and
angry	 that	 I	 had	 witnessed	 what	 was	 essentially	 a	 private	 moment.	 He	 did	 not
look	 at	 me	 but	 asked,	 ”Where	 is	 Meghanada?”	 I	 did	 not	 know,	 but	 someone
answered	that	the	Prince	and	Athikaya	were	pursuing	Angada	and	his	men.
“I	 hope	 the	 bastard	 is	 caught	 alive.”	 I	 felt	 sorry	 for	 my	 King.	 He	 was
trying	 to	 pick	 up	 the	 pieces	 of	 his	 shattered	 dignity.	 Soon,	 a	 makeshift
palanquin	 was	 assembled	 and	 the	 King	 and	 Queen	 were	 lifted	 up	 and	 carried
down	the	treacherous	path	towards	the	palace.
“Fancy	that,	the	King	will	now	taste	the	leftovers	of	a	dirty	monkey.”	one
of	the	younger	soldiers	commented.	Many	around	him	snickered.
“He	should	have	finished	her	off	then.	Now,	imagine	the	shame	of	having
a	queen	dragged	by	her	hair	and	stripped	naked	by	a	monkey.	Who	knows	what
else	he	would	have	done	to	her,”	another	joined	in.	There	were	more	sniggers
and	whistles.
“Have	 a	 heart,	 you	 bastards.”	 one	 of	 the	 older	 soldier	 shouted	 back.
”What	he	did	was	truly	noble	and	 right.	How	many	men	would	accept	a	wife
who	has	been	shamed	like	this?”	There	was	a	lot	of	laughter	until	the	captain	of
the	 group	 turned	 back	 and	 shouted,	 “You	 boys	 will	 not	 understand.	 Had	 you
been	born	when	the	Devas	were	raiding	and	razing	city	after	city,	you	would
not	have	spoken	this	way.	You	owe	your	dignity	to	the	man	you	are	making	fun
of	for	standing	by	his	wife	at	the	time	of	her	need.”
A	lot	of	jeering	and	snickering	followed	the	old	soldier ’s	words.	Cursing
them	profusely,	he	became	silent.	I	thought	about	what	he	had	said.	‘Was	it	such
a	great	thing	that	the	King	had	done?	I	too	had	done	the	same	thing.	That	King
raped	my	wife	and	sired	my	son,	Athikaya.	Didn’t	I	bring	him	up	like	my	own?
Did	I	throw	my	wife	away?’	The	more	I	thought	about	it,	the	more	I	believed
that	 wӀy	 son,hat	 had	 happened	 to	 the	 queen	 was	 sweet	 justice.	 I	 felt	 sorry	 for
her,	 but	 he	 was	 reaping	 what	 he	 had	 sown.	 There	 was	 nothing	 noble	 about
accepting	one’s	wife,	even	if	she	had	been	raped,	and	here	there	was	doubt.	If
you	 were	 a	 man,	 you	 stood	 by	 your	 wife.	 Or	 you	 were	 a	 swine.	 There	 was
nothing	 great	 about	 it.	 But,	 perhaps	 the	 standards	 expected	 from	 a	 common
Asura	 and	 those	 expected	 from	 the	 nobility,	 were	 different.	 The	 nobles	 were
expected	 to	 be	 bastards.	 So	 what	 Ravana	 had	 done	 proves	 he	 was	 crude	 and
common	 like	 any	 other	 Asura.	 Strangely,	 the	 thought	 that	 he	 was	 like	 us	 was

comforting.	Maybe	there	was	some	hope	if	he	won	the	war	with	Rama.
As	we	neared	the	palace,	I	saw	that	the	shawl	that	I	had	covered	the	Queen
with,	was	lying	discarded	on	the	path.	I	barely	recognize	it.	It	had	become	even
more	tattered	and	torn,	more	like	a	dirty	rag,	after	having	been	stamped	upon
by	so	many	marching	feet.	Initially	I	thought	of	kicking	it	into	the	open	sewer,
but	 on	 second	 thoughts,	 I	 bent	 and	 picked	 it	 up.	 Maybe	 this	 humble	 rag	 had
served	its	purpose	for	queens	and	kings,	but	for	a	poor	man	like	me,	it	might
still	be	useful.	I	could	perhaps	mend	it	and	reuse	it.	I	did	not	have	a	spare	one,
so	I	had	to	make	do	with	what	I	had.	Maybe,	if	I	washed	it	carefully,	it	would
wash	away	the	smell	of	the	Angadas	and	Ravanas.

54	The	end	of	an	idealist
Ravana
The	 still	 body	 of	 Prahastha	 was	 brought	 to	 the	 palace	 at	 sunset.	 When	 I
came	out	of	my	personal	hell	where	I	was	hiding	with	my	wife,	he	lay	on	the
cold	 floor	 of	 the	 durbar	 hall.	 His	 body	 had	 turned	 blue	 and	 he	 looked	 older
than	 he	 was.	 He	 looked	 worn	 out	 with	 the	 worries	 of	 an	 empire,	 with	 the
plotting	and	planning,	thwarted	ambitions,	straight	jacketed	self	righteousness,
by	 the	 impossible	 wish	 to	 strictly	 adhere	 to	 dharma	 and	 a	 thoroughly
colourless	life.	I	suppressed	a	tear	for	my	best	friend	and	worst	enemy.	I	leaned
down	 towards	 his	 lifeless	 body.	 A	 few	 tears	 tore	 themselves	 away	 from	 my
hard	practiced	self-restraint	and	made	a	strange	pattern	on	the	floor.	‘Who	was
this	 man?’	 Once,	 long	 ago,	 I	 had	 been	 afraid	 of	 him.	 I	 had	 been	 sure	 that	 he
was	after	my	throne.	He	had	been	all	that	I	always	wanted	to	be,	but	never	could
be.	He	was	all	that	I	never	wished	to	be,	but	could	have	been.	He	had	been	the
restraint	 that	 had	 kept	 the	 wild	 beast	 within	 me	 leashed.	 He	 had	 been	 my
conscience.	He	had	been	what	kept	me	from	becoming	a	Rakshasa.	I	had	feared
him	more	than	anyone.	And	in	my	heart,	I	was	sure	that	he	would	have	been	a
better	leader	for	the	Asuras	than	me.
He	 was	 the	 ideal	 Asura	 leader,	 the	 real	 successor	 to	 Mahabali.	 Brave,
moral,	 honest,	 upright,	 incorruptible.	 He	 would	 not	 have	 invited	 the	 disaster
that	 was	 Rama	 onto	 us,	 like	 I	 had	 done.	 He	 would	 not	 have	 strayed	 from	 the
right	path.	He	might	not	have	built	such	a	vast	empire	but	he	would	not	 have
fallen	 hopelessly	 in	 love	 with	 Vedavathi.	 He	 would	 not	 have	 thought	 twice
about	 sacrificing	 a	 daughter	 for	 the	 Asura	 cause	 or	 if	 he	 had	 believed	 the
prophecy	to	be	nonsense,	he	would	have	had	the	courage	to	proclaim	it	to	the
world.	 Once	 he	 lost	 his	 daughter	 to	 Janaka,	 he	 would	 not	 have	 lacked	 the
courage	to	get	her	back	through	force	or	diplomacy.	He	would	have	brought

his	 daughter	 home	 long	 ago.	 Nor	 would	 he	 have	 let	 his	 wife	 be	 molested	 by
monkey-men.	But.	.	.perhaps,	he	would	not	have	taken	her	back	and	loved	her
in	quite	the	same	way,	because	of	the	shame.	He	would	not	have	done	many	of
the	 things	 I	 had	 done,	 but	 then,	 he	 would	 not	 have	 been	 Prahastha	 or	 րthe
shame.I	Ravana.
My	courtiers	remained	silent.	Jambumali	was	most	distraught.	Prahastha
had	been	his	friend	from	childhood.	They	belonged	to	the	same	generation	in
their	 thinking.	 When	 old	 friends	 die,	 they	 take	 something	 of	 your	 life	 with
them.	I	wanted	to	hug	the	old	man	in	his	distress,	but	did	not	have	the	courage
to	 face	 anyone.	 I	 had	 to	 be	 practical.	 Prahastha	 had	 to	 be	 cremated	 before
sunset.	 I	 wanted	 to	 hug	 Prahastha’s	 still	 body	 and	 tell	 him	 that,	 more	 than
anyone	else,	I	had	respected	and	loved	him.	I	also	wanted	to	tell	him	that	he	had
always	 got	 on	 my	 nerves	 with	 his	 unwarranted	 advise	 and	 talk	 about	 Asura
dharma.	Suddenly	I	hated	him	from	deep	within.	‘You	were	after	my	throne.	And
you	 would	 have	 been	 a	 much	 better	 king,	 for	 you	 were	 a	 much	 better	 human
being	than	me.’	If	he	had	been	King	and	I	the	Prime	Minister,	how	would	I	have
behaved?	 I	 couldn’t	 even	 imagine	 that	 as	 I	 could	 not	 have	 remained	 in	 that
position	for	long.	I	would	have	got	rid	of	my	master	and	assumed	my	rightful
position.	 ‘This	 man	 had	 so	 many	 chances	 to	 do	 that	 to	 me.	 He	 could	 have
poisoned	me,	had	me	stabbed	while	we	shared	beds	during	our	campaigns;	he
could	have	got	rid	of	me	in	a	hundred	ways.’	But	even	the	cynic	in	me	did	not
think	Prahastha	would	have	done	that.	I	had	trusted	him.	He	had	been	too	deeply
tied	to	his	own	principles	and	dharma	to	stoop	so	low	to	assume	kingship.	He
prized	his	soul	more	than	a	blood-stained	throne.
I	stood	up	and	a	junior	administrative	officer	came	and	bowed.	I	ordered
that	the	funeral	arrangements	be	made	quickly.	Then	things	happened	in	a	blur.
The	people	who	were	proficient	in	the	matters	of	last	rites	took	over.	My	Prime
Minister	 was	 covered	 with	 the	 red	 Asura	 flag	 and	 his	 bier	 lifted	 up.	 I	 too
wished	to	put	my	shoulder	to	it,	but	thought	it	would	be	rather	melodramatic.
After	 all,	 I	 was	 still	 the	 King.	 So	 I	 walked	 behind	 the	 humble	 funeral
procession.	People	had	lined	both	sides	of	the	road	and	filled	the	balconies	and
treetops.	The	procession	snaked	its	way	through	the	war-ravaged	road,	through
the	 streets	 that	 had	 seen	 a	 thousand	 violent	 deaths.	 I	 was	 shocked	 to	 see	 what
had	happened	to	my	beautiful	city.
I	wanted	it	to	end	so	I	could	go	home	and	sleep.	I	was	tired.	Yet	I	had	to	do
my	duty.	I	owed	that	much	to	my	slain	friend	and	dearest	foe.	I	walked	amidst
the	weeping	crowd	and	was	surprised	to	see	how	popular	he	had	been.	He	had

never	reached	out	to	people	and	he	had	taken	many	unpopular	decisions.	But	he
stood	 his	 ground	 when	 it	 came	 to	 doing	 what	 was	 right	 rather	 than	 what	 was
popular.	And	he	was	always	fair.	That	was	something	new	to	me.	People	loved
you	 not	 for	 the	 short-term	 popular	 things	 you	 did	 for	 them	 as	 a	 ruler,	 but
because	you	were	just.	The	country	silently	wept	for	a	man	who	had	been	like	a
strict	father	to	them.
And	 suddenly,	 I	 was	 afraid	 of	 the	 past.	 All	 that	 had	 stood	 between
Prahastha	 and	 my	 throne	 was	 his	 sense	 of	 fairness	 and	 doing	 the	 right	 thing.
All	 these	 people	 who	 were	 thronging	 to	 catch	 a	 glimpse	 of	 Prahastha,	 could
have	 just	 cremated	 their	 own	 loved	 ones	 just	 a	 few	 hours	 before.	 Still	 they
thought	 it	 was	 important	 to	 be	 here.	 Had	 he	 made	 one	 call	 to	 these	 people,	 I
would	have	been	swept	away	like	a	feather	in	the	wind.	But	Prahastha	had	never
lived	 in	 the	 palace	 and	 would	 vanish	 to	 his	 country	 home	 a	 few	 miles	 away
from	the	city	whenever	he	could.	He	always	said	that	the	country	air	suited	him
better.	 Thinking	 back,	 he	 had	 never	 once	 mentioned	 his	 family,	 had	 never
recommended	 a	 relative	 for	 a	 government	 job,	 or	 sought	 little	 favours	 from
me	like	most	of	the	others	around	me	had.	I	had	put	it	down	to	his	bloated	ego
and	resented	it.	But	now,	as	the	funeral	procession	wound	its	way	‫ۀ‬ob,	or	sto	his
country	 home,	 I	 could	 see	 that	 he	 had	 chosen	 to	 do	 so	 because	 of	 his
convictions.	The	neighbourhood	he	had	lived	in	was	neither	posh	nor	rich,	but
had	a	rural	charm	and	the	people	were	rustic.
The	procession	halted	before	what	looked	like	a	peasant’s	dwelling.	It	was
Prahastha’s	home,	a	neat	and	clean	hut,	with	a	thatched	roof	that	gave	it	a	cozy
feel.	 The	 yard	 was	 neat.	 There	 was	 a	 cowshed	 and	 a	 well	 nearby,	 a	 few	 fruit
trees	and	flowering	vines,	and	a	duck	pond.	I	now	understood	why	my	Prime
Minister	wished	to	escape	from	my	gaudy	palace	to	this	rustic	haven.	It	was	not
poverty	he	had	chosen,	but	rich	simplicity.	I	had	not	known	this	side	of	the	man
I	had	once	hated	and	feared.	There	were	many	people,	not	the	rich	and	social
types,	but	poor	villagers	and	petty	officials,	who	stood	in	groups.	As	I	moved
in,	a	sudden	hush	fell	and	I	felt	I	was	intruding	into	their	private	grief.	A	man
who	resembled	Prahastha	came	out	and	bowed.	Someone	whispered	that	he	was
the	Prime	Minister ’s	son.	I	patted	his	shoulder	and	walked	in.	In	the	darkness	of
the	hut,	I	could	discern	the	smooth	forms	of	women,	hunched	over	in	grief.	A
woman	slowly	stood	up	and	walked	towards	me.	As	the	light	fell	on	her	face,	I
recognized	my	slain	Prime	Minister ’s	wife.
“I	am	deeply	sorry,”	I	said,	but	my	words	sounded	hollow	even	to	me.	She
did	 not	 move,	 just	 stood	 there.	 I	 grew	 uneasy.	 I	 had	 never	 been	 comfortable

with	 ceremonies	 of	 death.	 They	 reminded	 me	 of	 my	 own	 mortality.	 I	 could
hear	the	men	of	the	family	cutting	down	a	huge	mango	tree	to	prepare	the	pyre.
It	was	our	Asura	custom	to	plant	a	mango	tree	when	a	baby	was	born.	The	tree
grew	with	the	child	and	gave	its	fruits	to	all	living	things,	making	the	world	a
better	 place.	 The	 child	 was	 expected	 to	 do	 the	 same	 when	 he	 grew	 up.	 And
when	 it	 was	 time	 for	 the	 final	 journey,	 the	 tree	 gave	 its	 final	 sacrifice	 for	 its
namesake,	 vanishing	 into	 the	 smoke	 of	 the	 funeral	 pyre,	 along	 with	 its
companion.
Finally	it	was	over.	Prahastha	and	whatever	he	had	stood	for,	turned	into
formless	smoke	and	slowly	vanished	into	thin	air.	The	grief	throbbing	through
the	 people	 made	 me	 jealous.	 But	 they	 slowly	 dispersed	 to	 their	 own	 lives,	 to
their	 own	 woes.	 It	 had	 grown	 dark	 and	 the	 crickets	 were	 chirping.	 My
attendants	waited	outside	for	me	to	make	a	move.	I	emerged	from	my	stupor.	I
felt	heavy	hearted	and	wanted	to	say	some	soothing	words	to	the	widow	and	the
son	or	perhaps	his	daughter.	‘What	kind	of	a	leader	was	I?	I	didn’t	even	know
how	many	children	my	Prime	Minister	had.	Where	had	the	lofty	thoughts	of	my
youth	 gone?	 What	 happened	 to	 the	 ideas	 I	 had	 carried,	 about	 being	 a	 caring
leader,	 a	 man	 of	 empathy	 and	 kindness?	 In	 what	 poor	 condition	 my	 Prime
Minister	had	left	his	family.	They	were	peasants	now,	dirt	poor.’	When	the	lord
of	 the	 house	 had	 been	 Prime	 Minister	 of	 the	 empire,	 their	 simplicity	 had
charm.	Maybe	it	had	even	been	a	political	plus.	But	they	were	nothing	but	poor
wretches	now	and	it	was	my	duty	to	help	them.
I	 was	 about	 to	 send	 for	 Prahastha’s	 son,	 when	 he	 appeared	 and	 bowed
respectfully.	With	some	hesitation	he	deposited	a	bundle	of	silken	cloth	at	my
feet	 and	 bowed	 again.	 One	 of	 guards	 looked	 at	 me.	 Reading	 my	 consent,	 he
opened	it	in	front	of	me.	I	was	furious.	The	bundle	contained	a	gold	bracelet
with	the	Asura	insignia	on	it,	a	gold	chain	with	its	gold-tipped	tiger	claws’	and
a	 few	 neatly	 folded	 silk	 dresses.	 They	 were	 the	 personnel	 possessions	 of
Prahastha,	the	only	vanity	he	had	allowed	himself	when	he	attended	my	court.
“What	is	this?”	My	hands	had	gone	to	the	hilt	of	my	sword.
The	 young	 man	 stood	 silently	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 it	 seemed	 I	 had
frightened	 him.	 Then	 slowly	 he	 raised	 his	 eyes	 and	 said,	 “Forgive	 us,	 your
Highness.	It	was	our	father ’s	wish.	He	used	to	say	that	these	did	not	belong	to
us,	but	to	the	people	of	the‫	ۀ‬it	was	country.	They	had	just	allowed	him	to	wear
these	 ornaments,	 like	 the	 uniform	 of	 the	 palace	 guards.	 The	 moment	 he
resigned	 or	 retired	 or	 died,	 the	 same	 was	 to	 be	 returned	 to	 the	 King,	 who
would	 hold	 them	 on	 behalf	 of	 the	 people.	 I	 am	 just	 obeying	 my	 father ’s

wishes.”
There	was	a	deathly	silence.	Then,	like	water	draining	out	of	a	leaky	jug,
my	indignation	melted	away.	Tears	welled	in	my	eyes.	Prahastha	had	been	the
one	 who	 deserved	 to	 be	 Emperor	 of	 the	 Asuras.	 But	 then,	 had	 he	 had	 my
charm?	 Had	 he	 possessed	 the	 ruthlessness	 I	 did?	 Maybe	 he	 had	 possessed	 all
these,	but	he	had	chosen	to	live	and	die	by	something	beyond	them.	Above	all,
this	country	had	chosen	me	over	him,	that	was	the	nasty	truth,	and	he	knew	it.	I
had	 become	 the	 ruler.	 This	 country	 and	 its	 stupid	 people	 had	 not	 deserved
Prahastha.	 They	 deserved	 me	 or	 even	 worse,	 selfish	 rascals	 like	 my	 brother
Vibhishana,	who	would	sell	the	country	and	his	kin	for	a	fistful	of	gold	to	the
white-skinned	invaders	from	across	the	sea.
I	 walked	 away	 from	 Prahastha’s	 humble	 hut.	 I	 already	 missed	 his
arguments,	his	 stubbornness,	 his	advice.	I	longed	for	our	youth	and	the	 tense
relationship	we	had	shared.	If	I	came	out	of	this	war	alive,	I	would	build	up	my
empire	 again,	 but	 with	 more	 compassion,	 more	 probity	 for	 government
servants,	more	transparency	in	governance,	and	make	it	less	bureaucratic	and
more	people	oriented.	Prahastha	may	perhaps	have	had	more	influence	on	me
dead	 than	 alive.	 I	 hoped	 his	 sacrifice	 would	 not	 be	 wasted,	 but	 then,	 which
sacrifice	had	not	been	a	waste?
Lankini.	 She	 betrayed	 us.	 But	 then,	 I	 had	 half	 expected	 it.	 Asuras	 would
not	be	Asuras	without	betrayals.	That	had	been	why	I	had	wanted	Prahastha	to
stop	 Hanuman	 with	 the	 help	 from	 the	 wily	 Governor	 of	 Kanyakumari.	 ‘How
could	 all	 this	 happen	 in	 one	 day?	 Yesterday,	 we	 were	 on	 the	 verge	 of	 a
stupendous	victory.	Now	the	tables	were	turned.’
The	 reports	 I	 received	 were	 sketchy,	 but	 the	 picture	 that	 emerged	 was
typical.	Prahastha	had	been	delayed	by	bad	weather	and	by	the	time	he	reached
the	mainland,	Lankini	had	struck	a	deal	with	Hanuman.	Lankini,	who	had	a	lot
to	 gain	 in	 siding	 with	 Rama,	 let	 Prahastha	 believe	 that	 Hanuman	 had	 yet	 to
reach	 the	 mainland	 and	 insisted	 that	 he	 rest.	 Prahastha’s	 food	 had	 been	 laced
with	drugs	and	then	Lankini	had	stabbed	him	to	death	in	his	drug-induced	sleep.
By	then,	Hanuman	had	returned	with	the	essential	medicinal	plants	he	had	been
sent	 to	 fetch	 for	 the	 princes.	 I	 did	 not	 know	 whether	 they	 had	 succeeded	 in
reviving	Rama	and	Lakshmana	but	Lankini	had	been	audacious	enough	to	send
the	slain	body	of	my	Prime	Minister	to	me.	I	decided	that	once	I	had	finished
off	Rama,	I	would	ask	Lankini	some	pertinent	questions.
I	 was	 so	 tired	 of	 the	 war.	 But	 I	 didn’t	 have	 the	 power	 to	 stop	 it.	 The

juggernaut	rolled	on.	It	would	stop	when	the	time	was	right	and	not	when	the
participants	 wished.	 And	 it	 would	 destroy	 whatever	 came	 in	 its	 way	 –	 pride,
power,	life,	honour,	everything.
It	had	grown	dark	by	the	time	I	reached	the	palace.	The	torches	sputtered
in	the	cold,	salty	breeze	that	came	from	the	sea	and	the	world	danced	around	in
the	ever-changing	play	of	light	and	shadow.	The	sky	was	an	inky	blanket	with
holes	where	the	stars	flickered,	faded,	and	glowed	bright	again.	I	was	tired	but
hesitated	 to	 go	 to	 my	 bedroom	 and	 face	 my	 wife.	 I	 went	 instead	 to	 see	 my
daughter.	 The	 night	 was	 cold	 and	 she	 was	 all	 alone	 under	 that	 Ashoka	 tree,
where	 she	 still	 lived.	 I	 thought	 of	 my	 sons,	 Meghanada,	 Akshaya,	 and	 even
Athikaya.	 I	 hoped	 Rama	 was	 dead	 and	 the	 monkey-men	 had	 returned	 to	 their
jungle	 kingdom.	 There	 followed	 a	 few	 seconds	 of	 bliss,	 when	 all	 thoughts
ceased.
From	 far	 away,	 where	 the	 sea	 was	 a	 moving	 grey	 living	 thing,	 faint
sounds	 of	 cheering	 rose	 from	 that	 island	 hidden	 in	 the	 darkness.	 I	 had	 my
answer.	 .	 ‫ۀ‬ed.<.Rama	 was	 alive	 and	 the	 next	 day	 he	 would	 attack	 me	 with	 a
vengeance.	 Somehow	 I	 found	 the	 thought	 comforting.	 War,	 after	 all,	 was	 a
catharsis	for	my	numbed	soul.	One	way	or	the	other	it	would	be	decided	soon.
A	 soldier	 stood	 before	 me	 and	 bowed,	 “Your	 Highness,	 Prince
Kumbakarna	 is	 awake	 and	 seeks	 audience.”	 With	 a	 nod	 of	 my	 head	 I	 gave
permission	 and	 Kumbha	 walked	 in.	 The	 moment	 I	 saw	 his	 face,	 I	 knew	 there
was	going	to	be	trouble.

55	Kumbhakarna’s	attack
Bhadra
Rama	and	Lakshmana	were	saved	by	some	miraculous	Vanara	medicine.
The	brief	splutter	of	hope	that	had	arisen	in	our	hearts,	died.	I	watched	mutely,
too	exhausted	to	even	stand	up,	as	the	fort	gates	opened	and	hordes	of	Asuras
marched	 to	 meet	 Rama	 and	 his	 monkey-men	 once	 again.	 Riding	 amidst	 the
column,	on	a	tall	elephant,	was	Prince	Kumbakarna.	This	march	was	different.
The	 majority	 of	 soldiers	 did	 not	 not	 carry	 bows	 and	 arrows	 or	 swords.	 The
front	columns	carried	long,	bamboo	poles	sharpened	at	the	edges.	They	were
followed	by	Kumbakarna,	who	led	a	platoon	of	war	elephants.	There	were	no
chariots	this	time.	They	were	a	disadvantage	on	the	soft,	white,	sandy	beaches
of	 Lanka.	 Kumbakarna,	 in	 a	 single	 day	 had	 found	 the	 weakness	 in	 the	 Asura
defence.	 The	 Asuras	 had	 been	 fighting	 the	 war	 like	 they	 would	 have	 on	 the
plains	 of	 the	 mainland.	 It	 was	 a	 good	 defence	 strategy	 and	 suddenly	 I	 felt
enthusiastic	 and	 trotted	 along	 with	 the	 marching	 soldiers,	 unmindful	 of	 the
danger.	Kumbakarna	was	taking	the	battle	to	the	enemy	camp.
I	 found	 that	 many	 commoners	 had	 joined	 the	 ranks.	 A	 few	 were	 my
acquaintances	 and	 they	 invited	 me	 to	 join	 them.	 It	 was	 madness,	 but	 I	 joined
them	anyway.	The	column	stretched	for	miles	behind	us.	It	was	then	that	I	saw
two	shining	figures	on	horseback.	The	sun	was	behind	them	so	I	could	not	see
their	faces.
“There	 is	 prince	 Meghanada	 and	 his	 servant,”	 said	 the	 part-time	 barber
who	doubled	as	assistant	to	the	priest	of	the	street	temple	near	my	home.
He	carried	a	 stone	club	 much	too	big	for	him.	I	then	recognized,	to	my
horror,	 Prince	 Meghanada	 on	 the	 white	 horse	 and	 Athikaya	 faithfully
following	 him	 on	 a	 black	 horse.	 In	 the	 sea	 of	 club	 brandishing	 and	 black,
glistening	 bodies	 of	 Asuras,	 the	 two	 of	 them	 stood	 out	 and	 their	 ornaments

glittered	in	 the	sun.	‘They	were	 easy	targets	for	 Vanara	shooters.	How	foolish
can	the	young	be?’	I	tried	push	my	way	towards	my	son	and	the	Prince,	but	was
carried	away	in	the	tide	of	marching	fighters.
I	could	see	the	long	column	of	Vanaras	stretching	to	the	sea.	There	were
many	more	on	the	bridge	which	they	had	rebuilt.	Varuna’s	ships	stretched	right
to	 the	 horizon.	 There	 were	 Vanaras	 everywhere	 on	 the	 beach,	 screaming	 and
creating	a	din,	as	well	as	on	the	boats	that	were	being	launched	from	the	ships.
The	 first	 arrow	 from	 one	 of	 the	 flame-throwers	 on	 Varuna’s	 ship,	 whooshed
overhead.	Men	screamed.	The	Asura	archers	who	were	perched	on	the	trees	on
the	 cliff,	 showered	 arrows	 back	 on	 the	 Vanaras	 landing	 on	 the	 beach.	 Many
Vanaras	fell,	but	like	locusts	they	kept	on	coming.
Kumbakarna	 called	 a	 halt	 before	 our	 army	 reached	 the	 clearing	 on	 the
beach.	 Swift	 orders	 were	 passed	 and	 there	 was	 a	 lot	 of	 confusion.	 Captains
screamed	commands	and	there	was	a	lot	of	pushing	and	jostling,	but	finally	the
army	spread	out	in	an	arch,	in	the	cover	of	the	tress	instead	of	stepping	into	the
clearing.	 The	 Asuras	 waited.	 The	 elephants	 had	 giant	 logs	 and	 trees	 in	 their
trunks	 and	 waited	 at	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 clearing.	 I	 could	 see	 Prince	 Meghanada
getting	restless	on	his	horse	and	pushing	his	way	towards	the	Commander.	He
finally	succeeded	
Suddenly	 the	 murmur	 in	 the	 Asura	 ranks	 died	 down.	 The	 two	 Princes
were	arguing.	Kumbakarna	got	more	and	more	agitated,	but	Meghanada	kept
screaming	 at	 his	 uncle.	 Athikaya	 too	 joined	 in	 abusing	 Kumbakarna.
Meghanada	 wanted	 to	 attack	 immediately,	 but	 Kumbakarna	 had	 a	 plan	 which
Meghanada	did	not	think	was	brilliant.	He	called	Kumbakarna	a	coward	and	an
old	 woman	 and	 the	 Commander	 ordered	 his	 men	 to	 arrest	 Meghanada	 and
Athikaya.	 The	 situation	 became	 ugly.	 Kumbakarna’s	 men	 circled	 Meghanada
and	 Athikaya	 with	 their	 swords	 drawn.	 Meghanada’s	 men	 fought	 their	 way
towards	their	leader	and	soon	the	fight	had	spread	to	the	whole	army.	Asuras
do	not	need	Devas	to	be	defeated.	I	just	wanted	to	get	out.
It	was	at	this	moment	that	a	few	Vanara	soldiers	chose	to	rush	out	of	the
woods.	The	Vanara	Commander,	Jambavan,	screamed	at	them	to	stay	back,	but
I	saw	that	the	foolish	raid	was	led	by	none	other	than	Prince	Angada.	‘Why	 do
the	 young	 try	 foolish	 things	 to	 defy	 the	 old	 and	 more	 experienced	 elders?’
Kumbakarna	gave	the	order	to	attack	and	the	infighting	stopped.	The	elephants
advanced,	 massive	 hills	 of	 flesh	 with	 huge	 logs	 in	 their	 trucks,	 they	 moved
with	 unbelievable	 speed	 towards	 the	 Vanara	 army.	 Angada	 and	 his	 men,	 who
were	 full	 of	 enthusiasm	 and	 bravado	 a	 few	 minutes	 before,	 tottered	 in	 their

advance	 and	 took	 to	 their	 heels	 towards	 the	 safety	 of	 their	 group.	 But	 the
mighty	 mountains	 advanced	 relentlessly,	 smashing	 the	 Vanara	 ranks	 and
driving	the	panic	stricken	monkey-men	into	the	sea.	From	the	rear,	the	Asura
army	 advanced	 and	 caught	 the	 fleeing	 Vanaras	 trying	 to	 desperately	 escape,
and	clubbed	them	to	their	death.
The	 elephants	 wrecked	 havoc	 in	 the	 Vanara	 ranks.	 The	 column	 of	 men
brandishing	long	poles,	pierced	the	Vanara	ranks.	Soon	the	hairy	men	were	in
a	state	of	panic	and	despair.	From	the	cliff,	huge	boulders	rolled	down	on	the
fleeing	 Vanaras.	 Angada	 was	 caught	 by	 a	 war	 elephant	 which	 flung	 him	 far
away.	 The	 arrogant	 Vanara	 prince	 landed	 with	 a	 sickening	 thud	 among	 his
fleeing	troupes.	He	would	have	got	trampled	by	his	own	people	but	managed	to
scramble	up	and	dislodge	one	of	the	riders	fleeing	the	battle	scene.	In	disgust	I
saw	the	coward	fleeing	for	his	life	towards	his	own	camp	while	the	man	he	had
unseated,	died	under	the	galloping	horses.
The	 flame	 throwing	 from	 the	 ships	 had	 stopped	 as	 they	 retreated	 to	 the
high	seas.	Soon	the	Asuras	had	gained	a	clear	edge	in	the	battle	that	was	being
fought	on	the	land	and	the	sea.	I	didn’t	venture	into	the	frontlines	and	watched
the	Vanara	men	being	torn	limb	from	limb	and	trampled	by	the	elephants.	By
afternoon,	the	Asuras	had	advanced	onto	Rama’s	bridge	and	were	chasing	the
fleeing	Vanaras.	A	small	group	of	Vanaras	led	by	the	spirited	Hanuman,	was	all
that	 was	 left	 between	 Rama	 and	 the	 complete	 annihilation	 of	 his	 army.
Hanuman,	effectively	controlled	and	utilized	his	men,	creating	a	great	din	with
huge	 drums	 that	 confused	 the	 elephants,	 all	 the	 time	 shooting	 well	 aimed
arrows	at	the	men	riding	the	animals.
I	wondered	where	Meghanada	had	gone,	when	a	curious	whirring	sound
ripped	through	the	air.	The	noise	increased	and	many	people	stopped	hacking
each	 other	 to	 death	 and	 actually	 looked	 up.	 Flying	 low	 over	 this	 crowd,	 was
Meghanada	 in	 Mayan’s	 flying	 contraption.	 The	 huge	 fans	 of	 the	 machine
whirred	furiously,	whipping	up	sand	and	water.	I	could	also	see	Athikaya	in	the
machine	and	they	were	shooting	flame-tipped	arrows	at	the	Vanaras.	Some	of
the	Asuras	cheered	on	their	hero	but	I	saw	Kumbakarna’s	face	twist	in	anger.
He	shouted	something	which	no	one	could	hear	and	gestured	frantically	at	the
Pushpaka,	but	was	only	answered	by	a	daring	manoeuvre	of	the	flying	machine
that	almost	touched	the	Commander ’s	crown.	Kumbakar　d	hena	tried	hard	to
control	his	elephants.	They	were	edgy	and	did	not	respond	to	the	commands	of
their	mahouts.
Many	 of	 the	 flame-tipped	 arrows	 found	 their	 mark	 and	 many	 Vanaras

were	killed.	But	with	the	Asuras	busy	watching	the	spectacle	in	the	sky,	the	pace
of	the	attack	slowed	down	considerably.	It	was	then	that	disaster	struck.	With	a
curious	change	in	sound,	the	flying	contraption	sputtered,	its	fans	slowed,	and
then	it	fell	like	a	stone	into	the	water	near	the	bridge.	It	sank	and	then	bobbed
up	to	the	surface.	My	heart	sank.	‘My	son,	Athikaya!’	I	rushed	forward	but	was
stopped	by	stronger	men	hurrying	to	see	the	spectacle.
By	 the	 time	 I	 got	 a	 clear	 view,	 I	 saw	 that	 Meghanada	 had	 managed	 to
climb	 onto	 the	 bridge	 and	 was	 trying	 to	 pull	 up	 the	 contraption.	 Hanuman,
seeing	 his	 chance,	 commanded	 his	 men	 to	 move	 forward	 and	 capture	 the
Prince.	 Athikaya	 clambered	 onto	 the	 bridge	 and	 tried	 to	 aid	 the	 prince	 in
pulling	up	the	machine.	Kumbakarna	rushed	forward	to	save	the	Prince.	In	his
excitement,	Kumbakarna	was	some	distance	ahead	of	his	army,	trying	to	reach
his	 nephew	 before	 Hanuman	 could	 get	 to	 him.	 Kumbakarna’s	 great	 elephant
was	 hardly	 ten	 feet	 from	 Meghanada	 when	 an	 iron-tipped	 arrow	 pierced	 the
elephant’s	 head	 and	 entered	 almost	 two	 feet	 into	 its	 brain.	 The	 great	 body
shuddered	 violently	 as	 it	 crashed	 down,	 trumpeting	 loudly.	 Kumbakarna	 was
thrown	from	his	mount.
Arrows	 whizzed	 past	 Meghanada	 and	 Athikaya,	 but	 fortunately	 none
found	their	mark.	They	had	almost	managed	to	get	the	machine	onto	the	bridge
and	were	using	it	as	cover.	Many	of	the	arrows	struck	the	machine	or	zinged
past	it.	Kumbakarna	ran	towards	his	dead	elephant	to	get	his	club.	I	could	see
Rama	and	Lakshmana,	sitting	on	the	shoulders	of	mighty	Vanara	men,	shooting
arrows	at	Kumbakarna	and	Meghanada.	The	Asura	army	hesitated,	too	shocked
to	 believe	 what	 was	 happening	 in	 front	 of	 them.	 Hanuman	 and	 his	 men	 were
only	a	few	feet	from	Meghanada,	while	Kumbakarna	tried	to	pull	his	club	out
from	under	the	mighty	carcass	of	his	elephant.
I	watched	in	rising	panic,	when	that	wily,	old	rascal,	Jambavan,	cleverly
used	the	moment	to	instruct	his	flame	throwers	to	aim	at	the	elephants.	On	the
beach,	the	elephants	moved	as	a	mighty	wall	and	were	easier	to	control.	On	the
narrow	 bridge,	 where	 one	 elephant	 followed	 the	 other	 with	 a	 heaving	 sea
beneath,	the	animals	became	unwieldy.	When	one	of	the	flaming	missiles	found
its	mark,	the	elephant	panicked,	turned	around,	and	ran	back	at	great	speed.	It
crashed	into	the	elephant	following	it,	which	in	turn	panicked.	Soon	there	was
total	 chaos	 in	 the	 Asura	 ranks.	 Elephants	 ran	 amok,	 smashing	 everything	 in
their	path.	A	few	ran	towards	the	Vanara	ranks,	barely	missing	Meghanada	and
Kumbakarna,	 leaving	 death	 and	 destruction	 in	 their	 trail.	 But	 the	 majority	 of
the	 panic	 stricken	 elephants	 ran	 towards	 the	 Asura	 ranks.	 A	 few	 fell	 into	 the

water.
I	ran	for	my	life	and	clambered	up	a	coconut	palm.	Below,	men	on	both
sides	fought	the	beasts	rather	than	one	another.	With	a	mighty	crash,	the	bridge
collapsed.	 Meghanada,	 Athikaya	 and	 Kumbakarna	 were	 struck	 on	 the	 other
side,	 with	 thousands	 of	 enemies	 against	 them.	 The	 Vanara	 army	 succeeded	 in
slaying	 the	 few	 elephants	 that	 had	 strayed	 to	 their	 side.	 Kumbakarna	 had
succeeded	 in	 freeing	 his	 heavy	 club	 and	 stood	 brandishing	 it	 between
Hanuman’s	 men	 and	 Meghanada	 and	 Athikaya.	 The	 Asura	 army	 was	 in
disarray.	 Meghanada	 and	 Athikaya,	 to	 my	 surprise,	 had	 got	 into	 the	 flying
machine	 and	 were	 trying	 to	 get	 it	 to	 fly.	 ‘They	 weren’t	 trying	 to	 defend	 their
uncle.’	 Kumbakarna	 continued	 forward	 using	 his	 heavy	 club	 to	 deflect	 a	 few
arrows	as	he	advanced	swiftly	to	crush	the	heads	of	Hanuman’s	men.
Kumbakarna	 w　umbakaas	 too	 close.	 Rama	 and	 Lakshmana,	 and	 the
other	 archers	 could	 not	 get	 the	 range	 to	 strike	 Kumbakarna	 as	 he	 almost
merged	with	them.	He	smacked	the	Vanaras	with	his	huge	club,	smashing	their
skulls	and	limbs	before	they	could	brandish	their	swords	or	aim	their	arrows.
And	so	one	man	single	handedly	held	the	mighty	Vanara	army	on	that	narrow
bridge.	Jambavan	shouted	at	his	men	on	the	boats	to	surround	Kumbakarna	and
attack	 his	 rear.	 But	 some	 Asuras	 had	 regained	 their	 wits	 and	 prevented
Jambavan’s	 boats	 from	 getting	 within	 shooting	 distance	 of	 Kumbakarna.	 The
battle	started	in	the	sea	again.	I	could	see	Varuna’s	ships	turn	back.	Canoes	were
launched	at	a	distance	and	fast	approached	the	shore.	‘How	long	could	we	hold
on?	 How	 swiftly	 fortunes	 had	 changed	 and	 all	 because	 of	 that	 foolish
Meghanada	showing	off.’
By	 this	 time	 Sugreeva,	 the	 Vanara	 King,	 and	 Hanuman,	 had	 broken
through	the	ranks,	brandishing	huge,	iron	clubs	themselves.	I	tried	to	train	my
eyes	 on	 the	 enemy	 chief.	 ‘Where	 had	 Rama	 and	 Lakshmana	 gone?’	 They
seemed	 to	 have	 vanished.	 The	 fans	 of	 the	 flying	 machine	 started	 rotating
slowly,	 sputtered	 and	 stopped,	 and	 then,	 after	 a	 few	 moments,	 whirred	 again
and	stopped.	All	this	time,	Kumbakarna	had	been	fighting	a	duel	with	Hanuman
and	 Sugreeva.	 Alone,	 he	 held	 off	 the	 two	 great	 warriors	 while	 his	 nephew
fiddled	 with	 the	 flying	 contraption.	 The	 Asura	 army	 was	 now	 leaderless,	 and
saw	 both	 their	 Princes	 struck	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 enemy,	 fighting	 for	 their
lives.
With	 a	 strong	 blow,	 Kumbakarna	 sent	 Sugreeva	 crashing	 into	 the	 water,
but	 Hanuman	 broke	 through	 his	 defence	 and	 rushed	 towards	 Meghanada.
Kumbakarna	 turned	 and	 almost	 flew	 to	 catch	 Hanuman	 by	 his	 feet.	 Both

warriors	went	down	fighting.	A	few	arrows	struck	Kumbakarna	and	Hanuman
too	was	injured.	The	western	sky	had	turned	red	when	I	saw	Kumbakarna	lift
Hanuman	 up	 and	 smash	 him	 on	 the	 floor	 with	 great	 violence.	 Hanuman	 lay
there	without	any	movement	and	I	uttered	a	jubilant	cheer.	At	that	moment,	an
arrow	 struck	 Kumbakarna’s	 neck	 from	 behind	 and	 the	 tip	 that	 pierced	 his
throat,	caught	the	crimson	rays	of	the	setting	sun.	Slowly,	the	huge	body	of	the
brave	Asura	prince	collapsed	lifeless	onto	the	bridge	and	then	crashed	into	the
sea,	taking	a	huge	chunk	of	the	bridge	along	with	him.	Finally,	Jambhavan	had
managed	to	gain	a	strategic	position	and	Rama,	an	expert	at	shooting	arrows	at
people	from	behind,	had	not	missed	this	time	either.
With	 horror,	 the	 Asuras	 watched	 their	 Commander	 die	 and	 the	 Vanara
army	 rushed	 in	 to	 finish	 off	 the	 trapped	 Prince	 and	 his	 servant	 in	 their
contraption.	I	felt	dizzy.	Was	I	going	to	witness	my	son	being	torn	to	pieces?
Then	Hanuman	stirred	and	the	Vanara	army	who	had	thought	that	their	general
was	dead,	were	taken	by	surprise.	They	halted	as	Hanuman	came	to	life	slowly.
He	staggered	and	swayed	and	steadied	himself	on	the	flying	machine,	when	its
fans	 suddenly	 came	 to	 life.	 He	 panicked	 and	 jumped	 back,	 and	 before	 the
Vanaras	 could	 comprehend	 what	 had	 happened,	 the	 fan	 started	 rotating
furiously.	 Jambavan	 cried	 out	 orders	 to	 stop	 the	 machine	 as	 it	 lifted.	 The
monkeys	 rushed	 forward	 shooting	 arrows,	 throwing	 clubs,	 and	 hurling
themselves	on	the	machine	that	 was	quickly	rising.	A	few	brave	ones	tried	to
hold	on	and	got	chopped	into	pieces	by	the	rotating	blades.
As	 the	 sun	 set,	 the	 Prince	 and	 my	 son	 escaped	 in	 their	 machine	 to	 the
safety	of	Ravana’s	palace,	leaving	the	poorer	folks	to	the	mercy	of	the	Vanaras.
And	 the	 men	 who	 had	 left	 their	 families	 for	 the	 greater	 glory	 of	 their	 race,
fought	and	killed,	and	got	killed.	So	also	the	poor	Vanaras	who	fought	for	the
glory	of	someone	they	had	never	even	heard	of	a	few	months	ago.	Later,	when
Jambavan	 ordered	 his	 men	 back	 and	 the	 Vanaras	 retreated	 to	 their	 island,	 I
climbed	 down	 from	 my	 perch.	 On	 my	 way	 back,	 I	 scared	 a	 few	 jacka　	 fels
and	bandicoots	who	were	feasting,	and	without	a	second	thought,	stepped	over
the	 dead	 body	 of	 the	 part-time	 cook	 and	 priest	 who	 had	 shown	 me	 the
impressive	 sight	 of	 Prince	 Meghanada	 that	 morning.	 Another	 Prince,
Kumbakarna,	 was	 now	 food	 for	 the	 sharks,	 who	 fortunately	 did	 not	 value
heroism	and	enjoyed	both	heroes	and	villains	with	equal	delight.	I	would	have
given	anything	for	a	drink.	It	was	a	beautiful	night,	dark	and	strange,	a	night	to
get	drunk	and	sleep	like	a	log.

56	While	they	pray
Ravana
I	was	fuming	at	Mandodari.	I	wanted	to	finish	off	my	son.	Fool!	I	did	not
know	what	to	make	of	him.	Sometimes	he	showed	great	valour;	he	thought	and
behaved	maturely	and	showed	real	leadership;	at	other	times	he	made	an	ass	of
himself.	The	reports	I	received	were	clear.	It	had	been	this	fool’s	bravado	that
had	 lost	 us	 the	 best	 general	 in	 the	 war.	 Kumbha’s	 death	 hurt	 me	 much	 more
than	Prahastha’s	and	Maricha’s.
Twice	in	the	last	two	days,	my	son	had	fritted	away	the	chance	to	win.	And
the	 fool	 always	 rushed	 to	 the	 safety	 of	 his	 mother.	 And	 what	 was	 that	 black
rascal	 doing	 in	 the	 King’s	 chamber?	 He	 stood	 discretely,	 trying	 to	 hide	 his
huge	 frame.	 I	 rushed	 towards	 Meghanada	 but	 once	 again	 Mandodari
intervened,	“Leave	the	boys	alone,	Ravana.”
“Leave	the	boys,	leave	the	boys,	indeed!	When	will	this	idiot	grow	up?	It
is	the	company	he	keeps	that	has	made	him	thick-headed.”	I	glared	at	Athikaya,
who	seemed	strangely	hurt.
“Ravana,	do	not	make	me	say	things	I	will	regret	later.	Do	you	really	want
me	to	remind	you	why	this	war	began?	Do	you	want	me	to	say	that	the	entire
Asura	race	is	being	destroyed	because	of	your	adamancy	and	pride?	Please	do
not	let	my	tongue	speak.”
I	felt	helpless	in	my	anger.	It	hurt	because	it	was	true.	“Mandodari,	mind
your	 words.	 You	 are	 speaking	 to	 the	 Emperor	 of	 the	 Asuras.”	 The	 words
sounded	ridiculous	even	to	me.
She	just	glared	at	me,	“Ravana,	it	would	be	best	if	you	go	and	rest.”
I	stood	there	for	some	time	not	knowing	what	to	do.	Then	I	walked	away.	I
felt	lonely	and	let	down,	bitter	and	angry.	Why	did	such	terrible	things	have	to
happen	to	me?	Why	was	I	so	unhappy	and	unlucky	in	life?	Why	did	I	have	to

struggle	for	everything?	I	would	never	have	committed	the	stupid	mistakes	that
my	 pampered	 son	 had	 done.	 He	 would	 one	 day	 inherit	 the	 largest	 empire	 the
world	had	ever	seen.
Kumbha,	my	brother,	I	forsook	you	long	ago.	I	never	tried	to	stop	your
slide.	Maybe	I	even	encouraged	it	as	it	suited	me.	I	was	afraid	of	you.	I	could
see	the	ambition	fluttering	in	your	mind	and	feel	your	envy.	You	wanted	to	be
King.	 Little	 did	 you	 know	 the	 perils	 of	 kingship	 or	 how	 power	 corrupts	 and
corrodes	 the	 soul.	 You	 drowned	 your	 ambitions	 in	 opium	 and	 wine,	 but	 the
opium	 of	 power	 I	 took,	 was	 far	 more	 potent	 than	 anything	 you	 had.	 Your
intoxications	 fed	 on	 constant	 intake	 of	 poison,	 mine	 in	 many	 acts	 of	 tyranny.
You	were	a	giant	asleep	in	your	ignorance,	I	was	a	little	man	wide	awake	in	my
power.	Your	ambition	was	raw	and	your	feelings	always	transparent.	You	made
me	afraid	for	I	loved	my	throne	more	than	you.	I	loved	power	even	more	than
myself.	I	feared	that	one	day	you	would	wake	up	and	plot	behind	my	back	for
my	 throne.	 When	 wine	 claimed	 you,	 I	 was	 relieved.	 Yet	 I	 kept	 a	 watch,	 I
ensured	that	you	remain	intoxicated	and	asleep.
You	Kumbha,	were	the	one	who	disturbed	my	sleep.	But	when	treachery
came,	 it	 did	 not	 come	 from	 you.	 It	 came	 from	 the	 little	 brother	 we	 were	 all
fond	 of.	 How	 we	 used	 to	 pull	 his	 leg,	 laugh	 behind	 his	 back,	 and	 make	 up
amusing	stories	about	the	Asura	boy	who	desperately	tried	to	be	a	Brahminer
we	wer.	Now	the	joke	is	on	us.	The	enemy	is	at	our	gates	and	our	little	brother
is	leading	them	in	with	a	torch.	He	is	about	to	steal	our	dreams	and	turn	them
into	 nightmares.	 My	 mistake	 brother,	 my	 mistake.	 Forgive	 me,	 for	 I	 thought
you	were	the	dangerous	one	and	forgot	to	keep	an	eye	on	the	snake.
Kumbha,	 you	 were	 always	 right.	 I	 remember	 that	 you	 had	 expressed
doubts	about	Vibhishana’s	sincerity	long	ago.	But	I	was	naïve	and	thought	you
were	plotting	behind	my	back,	trying	to	make	me	fight	the	younger	one	so	that
your	 path	 to	 the	 power	 would	 be	 smooth.	 But	 when	 I	 needed	 you,	 when	 this
godforsaken	 Asura	 race	 needed	 direction,	 I	 sought	 your	 help.	 You	 were
courageous	 enough	 to	 point	 out	 my	 folly,	 but	 desisted	 from	 advising	 me	 too
much.	Now	I	realize	who	you	were,	but	it	is	too	late.	The	war	is	turning	against
us.	Soon,	the	civilization	that	we	reclaimed,	the	ideals	of	equality	for	all	men,
the	 beautiful	 cities	 and	 palaces,	 the	 majestic	 temples	 and	 royal	 highways,	 the
ports	where	merchant	ships	waited	for	the	finest	spices	and	cloths,	the	art	and
theatre,	will	all	be	crushed	under	the	feet	of	a	Deva	tyrant.	You	are	lucky.	You
won’t	be	there	when	the	great	Asura	dream	vanishes	without	a	trace.	You	will
not	 be	 there	 when	 Brahmins	 will	 be	 the	 brain;	 Deva	 warriors	 the	 limbs;	 and

crooked	men	like	Kubera,	the	 torso	 of	 our	grand	society.	 A	society	our	little
brother	 wishes	 to	 build	 on	 our	 corpses.	 Brother,	 you	 have	 gone	 beyond	 the
misfortunes	of	mere	mortals.	I	might	soon	follow	you.	My	only	fear	is,	when	I
meet	you	again,	will	I	be	able	to	look	you	in	the	eye?
Mandodari	 came	 and	 stood	 near	 me.	 Her	 touch	 broke	 my	 thoughts.
“Ravana,	the	boy	is	heartbroken	by	what	happened	to	his	uncle	and	thinks	it	is
his	fault.”
“It	is	his	fault.	War	is	not	a	place	to	show	off	his	daredevilry	to	impress
people.	Losing	Kumbha	is	the	biggest	setback	for	us	and	I	am	ashamed	that	my
son	 was	 the	 cause	 of	 it.	 I	 do	 not	 want	 him	 in	 the	 battlefield	 anymore.	 The
Asuras	cannot	afford	such	mistakes.”
“Ravana,	the	boy	is	already	devastated.	.	.	can’t	you	forgive	him?”
My	anger	was	roused	again.	“It	is	the	company	he	keeps.	What	business
does	he	have	to	tow	that	black	servant	along	with	him.	.	.”	I	faltered	before	the
look	in	Mandodari’s	eyes.
“Enough	 Ravana,	 enough.	 Why	 continue	 this	 war?	 Why	 don’t	 we
compromise?	Why	not	give	Rama	his	wife	back?”	She	was	almost	sobbing.
“You	think	I	don’t	have	any	honour	or	pride?	After	losing	my	best	men,
my	 brother,	 my	 friends,	 you	 want	 me	 to	 fall	 at	 Rama’s	 feet?	 You	 want	 the
Emperor	 of	 the	 Asuras	 to	 beg	 for	 mercy	 from	 a	 small	 time	 adventurer	 and
prince	of	a	tiny	barbarian	vassal	kingdom?”
“The	barbarian	prince	of	a	tiny	vassal	kingdom	has	swallowed	more	than
half	of	the	Asura	empire	now.	How	many	men	do	you	want	to	lose	before	you
stop	this	stupid	war?	For	whose	sake	are	you	fighting	this.	.	.”
“This	 war	 is	 for	 the	 honour	 of	 the	 Asuras.	 A	 war	 to	 stop	 the	 spread
casteism	and	Brahmin	hierarchy.	.	.”
“Save	 your	 political	 speeches	 to	 fool	 the	 masses.	 You	 are	 fighting	 this
war	for	your	own	selfish	reasons.”
“Mandodari,	you	are	forgetting	that	this	is	the	same	Prince	who	insulted
my	sister	and	disfigured	her.	Are	you	saying	I	should	swallow	that?”
“The	same	sister	who	you	made	a	widow.	.	.”
“Enough!	What	do	women	understand	about.	.	.”
“I	understand	well	enough,	Ravana.	Spare	me	the	noble	face	that	you	want
to	 project	 to	 your	 foolish	 subjects.	 You	 are	 a	 creature	 of	 passion.	 Irreverent,
arrogant	and	lustful.	You	want	to	project	yourself	as	a	rational	man	who	is	not
swayed	 by	 the	 superstitions	 and	 irrational	 beliefs	 that	 plague	 the	 common
Asura.	But	in	your	h뀀ou	areart,	you	are	as	superstitious,	as	afraid	as	anyone	in

the	street.	What	prevented	you	from	bringing	back	our	daughter	from	Janaka
when	you	regained	your	power?	How	many	hours	would	Mithila	have	lasted,
had	you	launched	an	invasion?	But	you	were	afraid.	You	were	afraid	that	if	our
little	daughter	came	back,	she	would	bring	destruction	in	her	wake,	the	end	of
the	Asura	dream.	So	you	denied	her	a	mother ’s	love.	You	denied	her	a	father ’s
affection.	You	were	drunk	with	power	and	loved	your	crown	more	than	your
family.	 You	 were	 afraid	 of	 the	 prediction.	 But	 when	 Soorpanakha	 was
disfigured,	 it	 was	 a	 mighty	 blow	 to	 your	 pride	 and	 you	 chose	 to	 steal	 your
daughter	 from	 her	 husband.	 What	 shame!	 You	 should	 have	 fought	 Rama
instead	of	stealing	his	wife,	even	if	she	is	our	daughter.	Now,	when	the	enemy
is	at	our	gates	and	the	predictions	are	about	to	come	true,	you	hold	onto	your
stupid	pride	and	ego	and	forget	that	you	are	a	king	first	and	a	father	later.”
“I’ve	 remained	 silent	 and	 suffered	 your	 arrogance	 and	 ego.	 I	 remained
silent	when	you	raped	my	maid	and	made	her	pregnant.	I	remained	silent	when
I	 heard	 that	 you	 were	 fooling	 around	 with	 that	 Brahmin	 woman.	 I	 suffered
silently	when	you	mourned	her	death.	I	was	silent	when	I	heard	you	muttering
Vedavathi’s	 name	 in	 your	 sleep.	 I	 have	 lived	 in	 silence	 when	 you	 left	 me	 for
years,	busy	building	your	empire,	fighting	violent	wars,	doing	the	same	cruel
things	 that	 you	 people	 accuse	 the	 Devas	 of,	 running	 long	 campaigns	 in	 faraway	 lands.	 I,	 like	 the	 other	 women,	 have	 been	 silent	 while	 you	 foolish	 men
painted	the	earth	red	with	the	blood.	And	see	what	you	have	brought	us	to.	Just
this	once,	listen	to	me	my	beloved.	.	.	give	Sita	back	to	her	husband.”
“Shut	your	mouth,	woman!”	I	exploded,	“you	are	talking	too	much.”
I	 didn’t	 know	 what	 to	 say.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 I	 stood	 naked	 on	 the	 road.	 My
innermost	thoughts	had	been	laid	bare	and	they	were	not	pretty.
“Do	you	think	I	relish	the	thought	of	sending	Sita	to	Rama?	But	Ravana,	I
love	you	more	than	I	love	our	daughter.	I	do	not	want	to	lose	you.	We	will	lose
this	 war,	 Ravana,	 we	 will	 lose	 this.	 The	 moment	 you	 brought	 her	 to	 Lanka,	 I
was	afraid	-	for	her,	for	myself	and	for	you.	I	wanted	you	to	send	her	back	to
her	 husband.	 But	 before	 I	 could	 do	 anything,	 you	 started	 the	 war.	 Thousands
have	 been	 slain.	 Have	 you	 ever	 thought	 how	 we	 women	 suffer?	 I	 have	 lost	 a
son.	But	I	am	just	one	of	so	many	poor	woman	who	have	lost	sons,	husbands,
fathers,	 brothers;	 their	 homes,	 their	 honour	 and	 their	 pride.	 Only	 you	 have
pride?	You	know	what	your	enemies	did	to	me.	And	what	did	you	do?	Did	you
even	go	to	the	battlefield?	No!	You	sent	your	son,	your	brother,	your	friends,
your	ministers.	But	you	hid	here	like	a	coward…”
“Be	silent.	.	.”	I	grabbed	her	by	her	throat.

“Go	on.	Kill	me!”
I	 threw	 her	 down	 in	 disgust	 and	 stormed	 out	 of	 the	 room.	 I	 fumed	 with
impotent	 rage.	 I	 felt	 worthless	 and	 sick.	 Involuntarily	 I	 turned	 towards	 the
Ashoka	 tree	 where	 Sita	 sat.	 I	 could	 see	 the	 hunched	 figure	 in	 the	 darkness.	 A
small	 lamp	 threw	 rays	 of	 feeble	 light.	 As	 I	 moved	 near,	 she	 looked	 up	 and
turned	 her	 back	 towards	 me.	 I	 wanted	 to	 touch	 her,	 to	 hug	 her	 and	 say,	 ‘See,
how	much	I	am	sacrificing	for	you.”	But	something	held	me	back.	I	stood	there
for	a	long	time,	trying	to	pick	up	the	courage	to	talk	to	my	daughter.	Then,	in	a
voice	that	was	barely	audible,	I	said,	“Daughter.	.	.”
There	 was	 no	 reaction	 for	 some	 time	 and	 I	 did	 not	 have	 the	 courage	 to
call	her	once	more.	Then	I	saw	that	her	little	body	was	trembling	and	I	could
hear	her	faint	sobs.
“Sita,	you	are	my	daughter.	.	.	I	loved	your	mother	more	than	anyone	else
in	my	life.	But	now	I	love	you	more	than	I	love	myself.”	Except	for	her	sobs,
nothing	c뀀moreould	be	heard.	I	did	not	know	how	to	continue	but	said,	“Will
you	stay	here	with	your	father,	as	Princess	of	Lanka?	If	you	say	so.	.	.	I	shall
ask	for	a	truce.	.	.	Rama	does	not	deserve	to	be	your	husband.	Stay	with	your
father	always.”
There	was	no	answer	from	her.	She	did	not	even	turn.
“Please.	.	.please	do	not	go	with	your	husband.	.	.	He	is	a	barbarian.”
With	a	flash	of	anger,	she	turned	and	said,	“I	love	him.	.	.	I	am	his	wedded
wife.”
I	was	taken	aback	by	this	sudden	display	of	fury.	I	did	not	know	what	to
say	but	I	made	a	final	attempt.	“Sita,	I	am	your	father	and-”
“My	father	is	King	Janaka,	and	my	husband	is	Lord	Rama.”
I	stood	there,	utterly	helpless.	Pain	gnawed	at	my	soul	as	I	turned	back.
“Uncle.	.	.”	It	was	then	that	I	noticed	Trijata.	I	did	not	want	to	face	her	now.
She	would	have	heard	about	her	father.	“Uncle,	did	my	father	fight	like	a	brave
Asura	warrior	today?”
“I	am	sorry,	Trijata.	.	.”	I	had	no	words	left	for	her.
“I	have	heard	from	my	mother	that	my	father	was	always	a	great	warrior,
better	even	than	you,	before	wine	claimed	him.	But,	while	I	was	growing	up,	he
had	 already	 wasted	 away.	 It	 was	 not	 easy	 for	 me	 to	 grow	 up	 with	 the	 tag	 of
being	a	drunkard’s	daughter.	How	I	wished	he	would	be	sober	and	normal	like
the	fathers	of	my	friends.	I	hated	him.	But	now,	when.	.	.”
“Trijata,	 your	 father	 was	 a	 brave	 man,	 a	 better	 man	 than	 many.	 .	 .”	 I
hugged	 my	 niece	 as	 she	 wept	 against	 my	 shoulder.	 As	 it	 was	 dark	 and	 there

were	 no	 one	 else	 to	 see,	 I	 too	 cried.	 Honour	 and	 pride	 can	 cause	 so	 much
misery.	 This	 wretched	 war,	 this	 wretched	 life,	 and	 the	 eulogizing	 of	 heroism
and	violence	–	I	was	sick	of	everything.
I	 was	 woken	 from	 my	 indulgent	 self-pity	 by	 a	 messenger	 who	 came
panting	 up	 to	 me.	 After	 that,	 everything	 that	 happened	 was	 meaningless.
Nothing	mattered	anymore.	I	had	become	a	cog	in	the	wheel	of	time.	I	became
a	stepping	stone	for	somebody’s	climb	to	greatness	and	godhood.	After	that	I
was	 just	 a	 minor	 player	 in	 Rama’s	 heroic	 epic.	 In	 that	 moment,	 everything
changed.
“Your	highness!”	The	poor	man	was	sweating	profusely	and	one	look	at
his	face	made	me	stagger.	The	blood	drained	out	of	me.
“Your	 Highness,	 something	 has	 happened	 to	 Prince	 Meghanada…”	 He
stood	staring	at	the	ground.	I	pushed	Trijata	away	and	ran	past	the	messenger,
who	followed	me.
“Where	is	he?	What	happened?!”	I	did	not	wait	for	his	answer.	I	feared	the
worst,	but	kept	denying	it	in	my	mind.	I	rushed	past	the	sentry	post	and	grabbed
a	horse.	The	fort	doors	opened	and	I	rode	towards	the	hill	fort	like	a	mad	man.
I	heard	the	roar	of	fire	as	I	passed	the	city	borders.	I	turned	back	to	see	my	city
in	 flames	 but	 did	 not	 stop	 to	 watch.	 ‘Let	 the	 city	 burn,	 let	 entire	 humankind
perish.	 Where	 was	 my	 son?	 Meghanada.	 Oh	 Shiva,	 let	 nothing	 happen	 to	 the
boy.’	I	could	smell	the	sticky	sweat	from	the	frothing	horse,	yet	I	seemed	to	be
riding	all	too	slowly.	As	I	neared	the	fort,	I	could	see	that	its	gates	were	wide
open.	I	rode	past	the	slain	soldiers,	lying	lifelessly	in	their	own	blood.	The	fort
was	 sunk	 in	 deathly	 silence.	 I	 dismounted	 and	 walked	 with	 dragging	 feet
towards	the	palace.	I	did	not	want	to	go	there.	I	knew	what	lay	in	store	for	me.
Yet	I	walked	past	headless	bodies,	limbless	torsos,	and	blood	stained	walls.
“Your	Highness!”	The	voice	startled	me.	My	minister	of	finance	and	the
keeper	of	the	fort,	Jambumali,	was	sitting	on	the	floor,	with	his	back	supported
by	a	pillar.	He	was	covered	in	blood	and	the	old	man	was	trying	to	stand	up.

“Where	 is	 Meghanada?”	 I	 asked,	 knowing	 what	 the
answer	 would	 be.	 He	 pointed	 towards	 the	 prayer	 room
where	my	son	used	to	pray	before	a	huge	idol	of	dancing
Shiva,	Nataraja.	A	glimmer	of	hope	fluttered	in	my	mind.
“Meghanda!	 Meghanada!	 Son!	 “	 I	 called	 out,	 half
expecting	 him	 to	 come	 out	 with	 his	 sheepish	 grin.	 With

trembling	 hands	 I	 pushed	 open	 the	 door.	 There	 lay	 my
son,	dead.	I	collapsed	on	the	floor,	averting	my	eyes	from
the	 horrible	 sight,	 yet	 strangely	 drawn	 towards	 it.
Meghanda’s	 head	 rested	 on	 the	 foot	 of	 Shiva,	 severed
from	 his	 body	 which	 lay	 a	 few	 feet	 away.	 Four	 arrows
had	 pierced	 his	 back.	 It	 was	 evident	 my	 boy	 had	 died
before	 he	 knew	 what	 was	 happening.	 He	 has	 been	 shot
from	 the	 back.	 After	 he	 had	 collapsed,	 they	 had	 hacked
him	into	pieces.
“It	was	Lakshmana	who	broke	into	the	fort.	There	were	almost	forty	men.
No	 one	 knew	 how	 they	 came	 and	 entered	 the	 fort	 or	 how	 they	 knew	 that	 the
Prince	 was	 here,	 praying.”	 The	 old	 man	 sobbed	 uncontrollably.	 “The	 prince
was	in	very	low	spirits	when	he	came	here.	He	told	me	that	he	had	lost	the	war
and	had	been	responsible	for	his	uncle’s	death.	He	wanted	to	pray.	.	.	but.	.	.see
how.	.	.he.	.	.”
“Where	is	the	other	boy?”	I	had	grown	almost	numb.
“Killed,	 perhaps	 lying	 somewhere	 outside.	 Everyone	 was	 killed.	 They
spared	me,	maybe	because	I	am	an	old	man.”
A	small	movement	behind	the	huge	Nataraja	idol	caught	my	attention.	But
I	did	not	have	the	courage	to	go	there	because	I	would	have	had	to	walk	around
the	 hacked	 body	 of	 my	 Meghanada.	 A	 huge	 black	 hand	 clutched	 the	 idol	 and
slowly,	the	black	body	of	Athikaya	stood	up.	He	was	covered	in	blood,	but	he
tried	 to	 walk	 towards	 us.	 He	 saw	 Meghanada	 and	 a	 piteous	 animal	 cry	 rose
from	his	lips.	He	looked	at	me	blankly	and	then	at	Jambumali.	Athikaya’s	face
contorted	 into	 a	 ferocious	 scowl.	 I	 looked	 at	 my	 old	 minister.	 He	 had	 grown
pale.	 Athikaya	 rushed	 towards	 Jambumali	 with	 all	 his	 strength	 as	 Jambumali
ran.	 Before	 he	 could	 move	 further,	 I	 grabbed	 him	 by	 his	 arms	 and	 held	 him
still.	But	before	Athikaya	could	reach	us,	he	collapsed	onto	the	floor,	his	face
hitting	 the	 wet	 surface.	 He	 tried	 to	 rise	 once	 more	 but	 fell	 back.	 I	 pushed
Jambumali	 towards	 the	 opposite	 corner,	 from	 where	 he	 could	 not	 run	 out
without	 passing	 me.	 He	 sat	 in	 the	 corner	 with	 his	 body	 trembling	 with	 fear.	 I
moved	towards	Athikaya	and	turned	his	face	towards	me.

“It	was	he.	.	.he	opened.	.	.the	gates.	.	.I	tried	to	save	the	Prince.	.	.forgive
me.	 .	 .I	 could	 not.	 .	 .I	 tried.	 .	 .I	 really	 tried.	 .	 .	 Lakshmana	 had	 come	 and.	 .	 .
Jambumali	guided	them	here.	.	.I	was	outside	and	saw	it.	.	.Prince.	.	.wanted	to
be.	 .	 .alone.	 .	 .so	 I	 left	 him	 and.	 .	 .was	 outside.	 .	 .near	 the	 gate.	 .	 .when	 I	 came
back.	.	.I	saw	him.	.	.standing	over	the	body	of.	.	.I	fought.	.	.but	they.	.	.escaped.	.
.I	tried.	.	.I	tried.	.	.”	His	life	was	ebbing	fast.	I	tried	to	lift	him	but	it	was	difficult
to	 raise	 his	 huge	 body.	 Slowly,	 as	 I	 watched,	 my	 illegitimate	 son	 died	 in	 my
arms.	I	put	him	down	gently.	I	wanted	to	cry	out	aloud	but	I	slowly	stood	up.
The	old	man	Jambumali	sat	quivering	in	the	corner	like	a	rat.	I	went	near	and
kicked	 him	 between	 his	 legs.	 He	 screamed	 as	 he	 grabbed	 my	 foot.	 “Mercy.	 .
.mercy.	.	.your	Highness.”	he	squeaked.	I	took	out	my	dagger	and	hacked	him
into	pieces,	slowly,	very	slowly,	taking	my	own	sweet	time.	Now	I	had	all	the
time	in	the	world.	I	was	undecided	at	first,	but	then	I	started	with	his	eyes	and
worked	 downwards.	 And	 I	 relished	 the	 task.	 His	 screams	 were	 music	 to	 my
ears.

57	Funeral	of	martyrs
Bhadra
I	rushed	to	the	palace	when	I	heard	the	news	I	had	feared	most.	It	was	very
early	 in	 the	 morning.	 It	 was	 finally	 over.	 My	 son,	 the	 ce	 whefool,	 had	 got
himself	 killed	 along	 with	 the	 Prince.	 I	 knew	 it	 was	 bound	 to	 happen	 one	 day.
And	I	could	not	do	a	thing	about	it.	The	love	of	a	father	for	his	son	is	always
one-sided.	When	I	reached	there	I	cried	aloud	and	beat	my	breast	and	rolled	in
the	street.	I	could	not	help	myself.	I	told	anyone	who	would	listen,	that	my	son
had	 been	 killed	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 the	 Prince.	 But	 no	 one	 cared.	 They	 were	 all
rushing	to	mourn	the	death	of	the	Prince	and	enjoy	a	grand	funeral.	There	was
a	 huge	 crowd	 on	 both	 sides	 of	 the	 street.	 I	 wondered	 why	 there	 was	 no	 war
today.	It	had	become	routine	now,	so	it	seemed	strange	that	a	day	could	dawn
without	a	battle.	They	blocked	my	way	into	the	palace.	I	pleaded	with	them	and
tried	 to	 bribe	 my	 way	 through,	 but	 the	 guards	 were	 rougher	 than	 usual	 and
pushed	me	away.
“My	son	has	been	killed.	My	son	has	been	killed	for	the	Prince.	My	son.	.
.”
“You	beggar,	move	out	of	the	way.”	A	guard	pushed	me	away	with	such
great	force	that	I	lost	balance	and	fell	on	my	face.	But	I	stood	up	angrily.	My
son	had	become	a	martyr	for	the	country,	and	instead	of	treating	me	with	the
respect	due	to	a	martyrs	father,	they	were	treating	me	like	a	beggar.
“Please	let	me	in.	.	.”
“You	 fool,	 the	 bier	 carrying	 the	 Prince’s	 body	 is	 on	 the	 way	 from
Subela.”	One	of	the	ruffian-guards	shoved	me	to	one	side.	Helplessly,	I	stood
panting.	No	one	listened	to	me.	My	son	had	died	and	there	was	not	even	an	iota
of	 pity	 or	 sympathy	 from	 anyone.	 I	 was	 getting	 angrier	 by	 the	 minute	 and
abused	 Ravana	 and	 everyone	 else	 I	 could	 think	 of.	 For	 some	 minutes	 people

ignored	me,	but	after	a	while,	a	guard	walked	towards	me	and	slapped	me	hard
across	 my	 face.	 My	 head	 spun	 and	 I	 fell	 into	 the	 drain.	 I	 lay	 there	 moaning,
without	 the	 energy	 or	 will	 to	 get	 up.	 When	 I	 heard	 the	 distant	 rumbling	 of
chariot	wheels,	I	crawled	up	from	the	gutter.	People	moved	away	as	I	tried	to
push	my	way	through	to	the	front.
The	 chariots	 drew	 near	 and	 a	 huge	 crowd	 jostled,	 pushed	 and	 shouted
slogans,	thoroughly	enjoying	their	sadness.	Wails	rose	from	the	crowd	as	the
biers	 carrying	 the	 dead	 bodies	 of	 the	 slain	 men	 slowly	 crawled	 towards	 the
palace.	 People	 competed	 with	 each	 other	 to	 wail	 the	 loudest.	 Flowers	 were
thrown	 onto	 the	 bodies.	 Everyone	 cried	 for	 Prince	 Meghanada.	 ‘My	 son	 was
dead	and	these	people	were	making	this	into	a	spectacle.’
At	the	head	of	the	procession,	Ravana	sat,	his	head	bowed.	On	his	lap,	lay
Meghanada.	Silent	tears	and	sweat	dripped	from	the	King’s	face	onto	the	face
of	 his	 beloved	 son.	 The	 Prince’s	 face	 was	 bloody	 and	 grotesque.	 Death	 had
taken	 all	 his	 youth	 and	 beauty.	 As	 they	 neared	 me,	 my	 heart	 pounded	 in	 my
chest.	 ‘Where	 was	 my	 son,	 my	 Athikaya?’	 The	 crowd	 grew	 frantic	 as	 the
procession	 neared.	 I	 pushed	 forward	 but	 the	 crowd	 pushed	 me	 back	 again.	 I
saw	there	were	many	bullock	carts	following	the	royal	chariot	and	many	more
dead	bodies	of	lesser	men	had	been	heaped	on	them.	Maybe	Athikaya	was	lying
in	one	of	those.
Many	people	ran	behind	the	carts,	some	with	heart	rendering	wails,	and	I
joined	them.	I	was	panting	hard	by	the	time	I	reached	the	last	cart.	Limp	bodies
of	slain	men	were	thrown	like	vegetable	sacks	into	the	carts.	Blood	dripped	and
made	a	trail	in	the	street.	Crows	landed	surreptitiously	on	the	carts	to	get	a	peck
of	human	flesh.	Death	was	cheap.	But	my	son	was	dead.	‘Where	was	his	body?
Had	 they	 forgotten	 to	 bring	 him?’	 I	 desperately	 tried	 to	 get	 a	 glimpse	 of	 the
faces,	but	all	the	dead	men	looked	alike.	My	eyes	blurred.	‘Why	did	the	boy	not
listen	 to	 me?’	 He	 was	 in	 bad	 company.	 I	 should	 have	 left	 Lanka	 long	 ago.	 I
sholuruld	have	left	for	my	little	village	on	the	banks	of	the	Poorna.	Why	did	I
stay?	What	did	I	have	to	do	with	the	Ravanas	and	Ramas	of	this	world?	They
and	their	wars.	Ravana	had	raped	my	wife	and	given	me	a	son.	Then	he	took
him	away	when	I	had	learnt	to	love	him.
I	cried	out	loud	in	impotent	rage,	at	the	loss	of	my	son	and	everything	I
valued	in	my	life.	They	were	going	too	fast	now.	How	could	my	old	legs	keep
pace?	 They	 were	 taking	 my	 son	 away	 from	 me.	 By	 the	 time	 I	 reached	 the
palace	 gate,	 they	 had	 started	 arranging	 the	 corpses	 in	 a	 straight	 line	 on	 the
ground.	 Guards	 with	 huge	 sticks	 cordoned	 off	 the	 area	 from	 the	 shoving

crowds	 trying	 to	 get	 a	 glimpse	 of	 the	 slain	 heroes.	 The	 chariot	 carrying	 the
dead	Prince	had	gone	in,	past	the	gate	to	the	palace	gardens.	Somehow	I	pushed
my	way	to	the	front.	The	dead	were	arranged	in	a	line.	The	wood	for	cremation
was	dumped	down	from	a	cart	and	a	few	got	busy	arranging	the	pyre.	I	pleaded
with	the	guards,	saying	that	my	son	was	there	somewhere	and	I	wanted	to	have
a	look.	Finally	a	guard	took	pity	on	me	and	led	me	by	the	hand	to	the	line	of
still	figures.	I	scanned	each	of	the	faces	of	the	unfortunate	men	who	had	been
killed	in	this	meaningless	war.	But	he	was	not	there.	‘Where	was	my	Athikaya?
Was	he	still	alive?’	A	flicker	of	hope	ran	through	me.	‘Maybe	the	boy	had	lost
courage	and	gone	into	hiding.	Maybe	he	would	come	back	chastened	after	a	few
days.’
Then	 I	 noticed	 the	 huge	 palace	 gates	 closing	 slowly,	 pushing	 away	 the
crowd	trying	to	force	its	way	in.	Inside,	there	were	two	pyres	being	prepared.
On	one	lay	the	body	of	Prince	Meghanada.	On	the	other	was	the	unmistakable
bulk	of	my	son.	I	ran	towards	the	closing	gates.	I	kicked,	screamed	and	fought
my	 way	 through	 the	 crowd	 and	 somehow	 managed	 to	 reach	 the	 gate.	 The
guards	 were	 covered	 with	 sweat	 and	 looked	 irritated	 and	 exhausted	 after
dealing	 with	 the	 unruly	 crowd.	 I	 tried	 sneaking	 in	 through	 the	 small	 gap	 but
was	pushed	back	rudely.	I	punched	the	face	of	the	guard	who	had	blocked	my
path,	 surprised	 at	 my	 own	 strength.	 The	 mighty	 guard	 lay	 flat	 in	 the	 mud,
knocked	out	by	an	old	man.	Before	the	other	guards	could	gather	their	wits,	I
ran	past	them.	Other	men	behind	me,	who	saw	their	chance,	also	tried	to	push
their	luck.	This	ensured	that	the	other	guards	were	kept	engaged	in	fighting	off
the	crowd.	This	helped	me	reach	the	funeral	pyre.
I	saw	my	son	lying	there	peacefully	on	the	sandal	wood	pyre	the	King	had
arranged	 for	 him.	 He	 had	 hundreds	 of	 wounds	 and	 his	 face	 had	 lost	 all	 that
rustic	charm.	He	looked	like	an	ugly	monster	in	death.	Yet	he	was	my	son,	my
only	purpose	in	life.	No	King	was	going	to	 claim	him.	In	life	they	had	taken
him	away	from	me.	In	death,	they	were	taking	him	beyond	my	reach.	He	had	a
mother	waiting	for	him	in	our	small	hut.	No	Ravana	could	stop	me	taking	my
son	to	his	mother.
The	 King	 stood,	 his	 face	 a	 mask	 of	 grief	 and	 misery.	 The	 Queen	 was
lying	 on	 the	 ground,	 her	 hair	 undone,	 quivering	 with	 silent	 sobs.	 The	 palace
sycophants	wailed	out	loud,	competing	with	each	other	to	show	off	their	grief,
making	 a	 thorough	 nuisance	 of	 themselves.	 A	 few	 men	 arranged	 the
sandalwood	logs	that	would	consume	the	Prince	and	my	son.	He	had	never	had
a	 place	 in	 this	 palace	 in	 the	 first	 place.	 When	 he	 had	 been	 alive,	 he	 had	 not

listened	 to	 me.	 He	 was	 just	 a	 dog	 in	 the	 palace.	 In	 death	 at	 least,	 he	 could
reclaim	 his	 manhood.	 I	 went	 to	 the	 King	 and	 stood	 there	 defiantly.	 I	 did	 not
even	bow	to	him.	‘Let	him	chop	off	my	head.’
“I	 want	 my	 son.”	 I	 told	 him,	 but	 he	 gazed	 through	 me.	 He	 did	 not	 even
seem	to	hear.
“I	 want	 my	 son	 back!”	 I	 shouted	 and	 got	 the	 attention	 of	 everyone.	 The
King	did	not	seem	to	register	my	presence.	‘Do	I	have	to	grab	him	by	his	hair
and	scream	in	his	ears?’	I	was	in	the	mood	to	do	so.	Slowly	the

king	looked	at	my	face.
I	sobbed	uncontrollably.	He	put	his	hand	on	my	shoulder	but	I	shrugged	it
off	and	screamed.	“Give	back	my	son!”
The	 Queen,	 shaken	 from	 her	 world	 of	 grief,	 came	 to	 us.	 “Ravana,”	 she
said	slowly,	as	if	the	very	act	of	speaking	caused	her	pain,	”Give	him	his	son.
Let	him	take	him.”
The	 kings	 face	 contorted	 in	 rage.	 “He	 is	 my	 son.”	 he	 whispered	 to	 the
queen.
“Not	at	all.	You	should	have	claimed	him	when	he	was	alive.	Your	son	is
Meghanada	and	no	one	else.	Had	you	admitted	your	mistake	and	taken	him	into
the	 palace	 in	 his	 infancy,	 I	 would	 have	 brought	 him	 up	 like	 Meghanada.	 But
you	forsook	him.	Now	we	do	not	have	any	claim.	In	fact,	we	never	had.”
Ravana	looked	at	me	and	at	his	wife,	with	anger	blazing	in	his	eyes.	But
the	Queen	met	his	eyes	unflinchingly.	I	did	not	have	the	courage	to	face	him	so
I	hid	myself	in	piteous	sobs	and	turned	away	from	him.
“Take	him.	Take	him.	Had	he	not	been	my	Meghanada’s	friend,	not	even	a
dog	would	have	cared	about	his	death.”	the	mighty	King	hissed	into	my	ear.
‘Yes	I	know,	my	King,	not	even	a	dog	cares	for	the	death	of	young	men	like
my	son,	who	died	for	you.	The	round	medals	you	give	away,	the	petty	jobs	you
offer	 to	 the	 kin	 of	 those	 who	 die	 for	 you,	 the	 paltry	 compensations	 which	 you
throw	from	your	brimming	coffers,	are	nothing	but	bones,	to	entice	more	dogs	to
die	for	you.	Let	me	take	my	little	dog	from	you.	He	has	served	his	purpose.	You
showed	young	men	how	glorious	it	was	to	die	for	such	abstract	causes	such	as
the	 motherland	 and	 racial	 pride.	 You	 honoured	 him,	 and	 fooled	 the	 public,	 in
arranging	 such	 a	 big	 procession	 for	 the	 dead.	 Everyone	 is	 happy	 that	 our
country	 has	 not	 forgotten	 the	 young	 who	 laid	 down	 their	 lives	 for	 their
motherland.	Everyone	who	has	been	martyr	will	be	remembered	–	until	the	next
meal.	Great	show,	my	King.	Now,	more	young	men	will	come	to	die,	enticed	by

your	 petty	 bones,	 two	 minutes	 of	 glory,	 and	 a	 stone	 memorial	 by	 the	 street
corner	which	real	dogs	will	piss	on.	My	son	has	served	your	purpose,	now	let
me	take	him	to	his	mother.’
I	 did	 not	 say	 any	 of	 this.	 If	 I	 had	 had	 the	 courage,	 then	 many	 like	 me
would	 have	 had	 the	 courage	 to	 echo	 it,	 and	 there	 would	 not	 have	 been	 any
Ravanas	 or	 Ramas	 left.	 I	 went	 to	 the	 limp	 body	 of	 my	 dear	 son	 and	 hugged
him.	 I	 tried	 lifting	 him	 up,	 but	 he	 had	 outgrown	 me	 long	 ago.	 Two	 soldiers
helped	 me	 lift	 my	 son.	 His	 body	 had	 gone	 rigid	 and	 he	 weighed	 much	 more
than	the	shoulders	of	his	poor	father	could	carry.	A	hand	cart	was	dragged	to
my	side	and	I	delicately	put	my	son	on	it.	With	the	nerves	in	my	arms	straining,
I	pulled	the	heavy	burden	towards	my	little	hut.	His	mother	was	waiting	to	see
him.
By	the	time,	I	crossed	the	palace	gates,	I	heard	the	loud	wail	of	the	women
as	 the	 funeral	 pyre	 of	 Meghanada	 was	 lit	 by	 his	 grieving	 father.	 As	 I	 turned
from	 the	 royal	 highway	 onto	 the	 dirty	 back	 streets	 leading	 to	 my	 home,	 the
Prince	 of	 the	 Asuras	 had	 vanished	 into	 thick,	 curly	 smoke.	 His	 friend,
companion,	 servant	 and	 half-brother	 was	 forgotten	 the	 moment	 this	 poor
Asura	laid	claim	on	him.	I	walked	alone,	dragging	the	cart	with	my	dead	son.
The	 sun	 pounded	 relentlessly	 with	 a	 thousand	 fists	 and	 I	 sweated	 from	 every
pore.	I	did	not	see	any	of	my	neighbours	or	friends.	They	had	all	gone	to	see
the	spectacle	of	a	Prince	being	cremated.
As	I	neared	home,	I	could	see	the	hunched	form	of	my	once	beautiful	wife
at	 the	 gate.	 She	 had	 waited	 eagerly	 for	 her	 son	 to	 return	 and	 came	 rushing
towards	 us,	 but	 stopped	 at	 the	 cart.	 In	 a	 flash	 her	 joy	 was	 replaced	 by	 shock,
then	deniall	w,	then	acceptance	of	the	cruel	blow	of	fate.	She	fell	on	Athikaya’s
body	and	pounded	and	shook	him.	She	tore	at	her	hair	in	grief.
I	left	the	wailing	mother	and	the	dead	son	to	their	world.	I	had	practical
things	 to	 attend	 to.	 I	 wanted	 to	 give	 my	 son	 a	 decent	 funeral.	 The	 sun	 was
setting	and	I	did	not	want	any	rituals.	I	just	wanted	it	to	be	over	before	the	sun
set.	I	was	sick	of	being	in	misery.	My	son	was	dead	and	it	would	remain	a	stone
in	my	heart	till	I	died.	I	desperately	searched	for	some	firewood	to	burn	him.
Nothing	 was	 available.	 It	 had	 been	 a	 long	 time	 since	 we	 had	 cooked.	 We
survived	on	the	odd	rats	I	trapped	or	some	unlucky	squirrels	or	rabbits	that	had
strayed	onto	my	path.	Far	away	I	could	hear	the	cry	of	the	crowd.	I	could	hear
some	enthusiast	crying	himself	hoarse	about	the	valour	of	Meghanada	and	the
crowd	 taking	 it	 up	 and	 roaring	 in	 reply.	 Anger	 rose	 in	 me	 in	 waves	 as	 the
slogan	shouting	rose	in	crescendo.	I	was	sick	of	everything.	I	was	sick	of	my

race,	of	being	dirt	poor,	of	not	even	having	firewood	to	cremate	my	son	who
had	so	foolishly	died	for	his	Prince.
When	I	struck	my	first	blow	with	the	axe	on	the	main	pillar	that	supported
my	poor	palace,	I	had	the	face	of	Ravana	in	my	mind.	Then	with	each	blow,	I
imagined	 I	 was	 chopping	 off	 the	 heads	 of	 the	 great	 men	 I	 had	 seen	 or	 heard
about.	My	wife	stopped	her	wailing	and	came	running	to	me,	screaming	that	I
had	gone	mad.	I	kept	chopping	my	palace	to	pieces.	It	had	become	a	game	now
and	 I	 was	 thoroughly	 enjoying	 it.	 I	 gave	 a	 blow	 each	 for	 Vibhishana,
Kumbakarna,	 Prahastha,	 Rama,	 Lakshmana,	 Sita,	 Mandodari,	 Jambumali,
Vidyutjihva,	Kubera,	and	Varuna.	But	before	I	could	chop	off	their	heads	as	I
would	have	liked	to,	my	hut	came	down	with	a	crash.
I	rushed	towards	the	cart	that	carried	my	darling	son	and	pushed	the	cart
into	 the	 rubble.	 The	 cart	 toppled	 over	 and	 Athikaya’s	 huge	 body	 fell	 on	 the
heap	of	wood	fragments.	I	ran	to	my	neighbour ’s	home.	He	always	had	a	lamp
burning	 in	 his	 puja	 room.	 I	 pushed	 the	 door	 open	 and	 rushed	 to	 the	 corner
where	the	small	lamp	was.	I	 took	off	my	 mundu	 and	 dipped	 it	 in	 the	 oil.	 The
cloth	caught	fire	quickly	and	with	that	burning	torch,	I	ran	outside.
My	 wife	 was	 trying	 to	 recover	 her	 petty	 possessions	 from	 the	 heap	 that
we	had	called	our	home	till	a	few	minutes	ago.	I	pushed	her	aside	and	threw	the
blazing	cloth	into	the	heap.	For	a	moment	I	held	my	breath	as	the	flame	died
down.	Then,	with	a	vengeance,	the	fire	leapt	up,	licking	clean	everything	I	had
ever	owned.	The	flames	voraciously	ate	away	my	son.	Athikaya	had	followed
his	Prince.	He	had	died	an	equally	heroic	death	as	his	half-brother,	but	the	poor
boy	had	been	born	with	the	wrong	skin	colour,	and	had	grown	up	on	the	wrong
side	of	the	city.	So	there	was	no	one	to	call	out	slogans	and	no	idiots	to	roar
back	and	shake	the	sky	and	the	earth	with	their	voices.	Yet	the	fire	did	not	make
any	 distinction.	 It	 had	 an	 equal	 appetite	 for	 my	 son	 and	 the	 King’s	 son.	 I
watched	with	satisfaction	as	the	fire	licked	its	plate	clean.	Hot	tears	burned	my
sunken	cheeks.	As	the	last	of	the	flames	died	and	the	ashes	crumbled	to	the	red
earth	of	Lanka,	the	skies	broke	and	rain	fell	in	torrents.	By	the	time	the	fury	of
the	 rain	 had	 ebbed,	 it	 had	 washed	 away	 the	 last	 remnants	 of	 my	 son	 and	 my
home.	My	loss	had	become	a	dull	pain	somewhere	in	my	mind.	My	wife	had
not	 moved	 from	 where	 she	 lay	 when	 I	 torched	 our	 son’s	 pyre.	 I	 felt	 hungry.
Maybe	they	were	serving	food	outside	the	palace	gates,	as	they	usually	did	for
the	poor	and	invalid,	at	such	times.	I	stood	up,	shaking	away	the	water	that	had
clung	to	my	body.	Maybe	if	I	hurried	I	could	get	something	to	eat	and	if	I	was

lucky	enough,	I	could	carry	a	packet	back	for	my	wife.	Maybe,	someone	would
offer	me	a	drink.	I	started	to	walk	towards	the	palace.

58	Did	I	fail	as	King?
Ravana
The	 enemy	 was	 so	 near.	 I	 could	 see	 the	 end,	 though	 I	 did	 not	 want	 to
accept	 it.	 Yesterday	 I	 lit	 the	 funeral	 pyre	 of	 my	 son.	 Now,	 there	 was	 nothing,
other	 than	 to	 fight	 Rama	 to	 the	 end	 –	 either	 his	 or	 mine.	 ‘But	 what	 was	 I
fighting	 for?	 My	 empire	 had	 collapsed,	 my	 son	 had	 died,	 my	 Queen’s	 honour
had	 been	 dragged	 in	 the	 mud.	 What	 was	 left	 now?’	 True,	 I	 had	 this	 beautiful
city	I	had	so	meticulously	planned	and	built;	a	fortune	which	I	had	plundered
from	the	Devas	long	ago;	and	my	daughter,	who	happened	to	be	the	wife	of	my
enemy.
But	 as	 things	 were	 taken	 away	 from	 me,	 I	 clung	 more	 and	 more
desperately	to	what	was	left.	Yet,	like	a	tidal	wave	hammering	away	at	the	solid
rock	on	the	seashore,	I	was	getting	battered.	I	was	withering	from	within.	The
will	to	live	was	ebbing	away.	Things	that	I	had	cherished	and	taken	for	granted
had	 become	 meaningless	 now.	 Rama	 was	 just	 an	 immature	 prince	 of	 an
irrelevant	kingdom	of	the	north.	The	boy	was	barely	a	few	years	older	than	my
Meghanada	had	been.	I	was	an	Emperor,	the	mightiest	that	India	had	ever	seen.
Ayodhya	was	just	a	vassal	state,	a	backwater	village	kingdom.	Yet,	how	did	my
empire	crumble	like	this?	Was	it	the	death	of	Bali	that	turned	the	tide?	Or	was	it
Vibhishana’s	betrayal?	When	did	I	lose	my	perspective?	Asura	empires	had	all
gone	 down	 to	 the	 Devas,	 despite	 our	 economic,	 cultural,	 and	 technical
superiority,	 because	 of	 the	 consistent	 in-fighting	 amongst	 ourselves.	 I	 knew
our	history	and	I	knew	my	people.	I	had	ruled	my	empire	with	an	iron	fist	and
ensured	that	I	had	only	trustworthy	people	in	powerful	positions.	I	had	kept	an
eye	 on	 people	 I	 suspected	 would	 turn	 against	 me	 –	 men	 and	 women	 who	 I
thought	were	unscrupulous	and	were	after	my	throne.	What	a	fool	I	was.
I	 watched	 men	 like	 Prahastha;	 I	 ensured	 that	 Kumbakarna	 was	 always

mired	in	his	world	of	alcohol	and	bhang;	I	made	sure	that	inherently	cruel	men
like	 Rudraka	 did	 not	 accumulate	 too	 much	 power.	 I	 foolishly	 believed	 that	 I
could	buy	a	pirate	like	Varuna	with	impressive	titles	like	‘Commander	of	the
Seven	Seas’	and	‘Grand	Admiral	of	the	Asura	Navies’.	I	had	killed	my	brotherin-law,	 Vidyutjihva.	 But	 I	 had	 been	 betrayed	 by	 men	 and	 women	 like
Vibhishana,	who	looked	pious;	like	Jambumali,	who	looked	like	a	bureaucrat
mired	in	his	own	world	of	accounts;	women	like	Lankini,	who	never	tired	of
publicly	 proclaiming	 her	 love	 and	 affection	 for	 King	 and	 country.	 I	 had
powerful	friends,	but	when	the	need	arose,	I	was	all	alone.	I	thought	my	empire
was	 built	 on	 steel,	 but	 when	 the	 shove	 came,	 I	 found	 out	 it	 had	 been	 built	 on
nothing	 but	 straw.	 Whoever	 I	 had	 trusted	 betrayed	 me.	 I	 was	 so	 proud	 of	 my
intelligence,	 so	 how	 I	 did	 I	 commit	 such	 fundamental	 mistakes	 in	 judging
people?
I	want	to	begin	again,	but	life	is	too	short	for	second	chances.	I	had	been
given	one	chance	and	I	had	grabbed	it	with	both	hands.	I	had	built	up	something
great,	but	now,	times	had	changed	and	everything	was	crumbling	around	me.	I
had	 no	 regrets.	 I	 had	 lived	 a	 full	 life.	 Enough	 of	 this	 self-pity.	 The	 time	 had
come	to	do	my	best.	I	knew	I	might	fail,	but	I	owed	my	people	one	last,	grand
failure.	They	were	the	only	ones	who	had	not	betrayed	me.	What	did	I	do	for
them,	for	the	love	they	have	given?	I	was	proud	that	I	had	built	a	great	empire
for	my	Asuras,	I	thought	I	had	given	them	dignity	and	freedom,	but	perhaps	I
erred.	I	was	a	tyrant,	maybe	a	benevolent	one,	but	I	was	no	Mahabali.	I	had	not
kept	 my	 ears	 and	 eyes	 open.	 And	 I	 had	 become	 blind	 to	 the	 sufferings	 of	 the
people.	 When	 I	 strove	 for	 bigger	 things	 –	 for	 bigger	 cities,	 magnificent
temples,	 wider	 roads,	 better	ported	 s,	larger	ships,	increased	 trade,	improved
business,	making	a	name	among	the	nations	of	the	world,	making	my	country
the	 richest	 in	 the	 world	 –	 I	 forgot	 something	 simple	 and	 basic.	 I	 forgot	 my
people.	 I	 thought	 glittering	 cities	 marked	 progress.	 I	 forgot	 about	 the	 people
who	 lived	 in	 gutters.	 When	 I	 gave	 lavish	 banquets,	 I	 forgot	 that	 most	 of	 my
people	had	nothing	to	eat.
Prahastha	 had	 pointed	 this	 out	 to	 me	 but	 it	 was	 such	 a	 boring	 subject.	 I
thought	 the	 wealth	 would	 trickle	 down.	 I	 imagined	 the	 freedom	 I	 gave	 my
people	to	protest	on	the	streets	and	the	liberty	to	express	their	thoughts,	would
suffice	 and	 they	 would	 be	 content.	 I	 was	 proud	 that	 I	 was	 not	 like	 the	 other
rulers	who	were	mere	tyrants	and	brutes	who	controlled	their	people	through
sheer	force	and	terrorized	them	with	military	rule	and	brazen	genocides.	I	was
proud	that	the	Asuras	had	evolved	a	system	in	which	the	King	was	powerful	but

nominal	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 the	 real	 power	 lay	 with	 the	 Panchayats,	 the	 elected
people	in	the	villages,	and	I	had	held	this	up	as	a	model	to	the	world.	Yet,	the
poor	and	wretched	whom	I	had	ignored,	stood	by	me.	They	knew	they	had	the
most	to	lose	–	the	freedom	that	gave	them	the	hope	that	they	could	do	better	in
life.	 The	 rich	 and	 the	 middle	 class	 whom	 I	 had	 pampered,	 either	 blatantly
crossed	over	to	the	other	side	or	sat	on	the	fence,	waiting	for	a	clear	winner	to
emerge	in	the	battle.	Today	would	be	that	decisive	day.
Was	 everything	 predetermined	 by	 some	 unknown	 power	 who	 was
conspiring	against	me?	My	tragedy	could	be	that	I	still	don’t	know	what	I	did
wrong.	I	made	errors	of	judgment	about	men,	but	they	were	hardly	reasons	for
such	a	large	empire	to	collapse.	It	sounds	absurd,	but	I	am	now	mature	enough
to	 know	 that	 things	 happen	 randomly	 and	 we	 poor	 humans	 get	 caught	 like
straws	in	the	wind.	The	middle	class	was	saying	that	I	was	a	great	sinner,	that	I
had	no	right	to	keep	another	man’s	wife	in	my	palace.	The	rumour	was	that	I
had	raped	many	women	in	the	past	and	I	still	had	many	woman	in	my	harem.
They	 called	 my	 government	 corrupt	 and	 claimed	 the	 officials	 had	 amassed
riches	at	the	cost	of	the	common	people.
I	 am	 the	 greatest	 fool	 in	 the	 world.	 I	 had	 pampered	 these	 people	 by
building	great	roads	so	that	their	gold-plated	chariots	could	rush	past	the	ruins
of	the	demolished	hutments	where	the	poor	had	eked	out	a	living.	I	had	driven
away	 the	 peasant	 from	 their	 fertile	 lands	 so	 that	 these	 gossiping	 fools	 could
build	their	bungalows	and	pleasure	gardens.	I	set	my	police	onto	the	pavement
dwellers	because	they	were	such	an	eyesore	for	the	middle	class.	I	chased	away
the	 poor	 who	 had	 flocked	 to	 my	 cities	 for	 their	 livelihood	 and	 had	 cornered
patches	 of	 land	 that	 were	 smaller	 than	 the	 space	 occupied	 by	 a	 rich	 man’s
chariot,	 for	 their	 entire	 families.	 I	 had	 diverted	 water	 from	 the	 fields	 to	 my
cities,	 so	 that	 these	 gluttons	 would	 have	 their	 fountains.	 I	 had	 damned	 rivers
that	 had	 irrigated	 the	 countryside	 and	 diverted	 the	 water	 to	 the	 cities	 so	 that
these	people	could	have	their	beauty	baths.	The	poor	had	to	go	thirsty,	die	or
else	 flock	 to	 the	 city	 to	 be	 the	 servants,	 gardeners,	 cooks	 and	 hewers,	 to	 the
privileged.
My	 elephants	had	pulled	down	little	 huts	to	build	huge	 shopping	 spaces,
where	 silk,	 ornaments	 of	 gold	 and	 precious	 stones,	 were	 sold	 to	 this	 crass
class.	My	coffers	were	full	as	I	collected	taxes	on	all	this	trade.	And	because	I
taxed	them,	they	demanded	that	I	build	more	roads.	They	complained	that	the
ports	 did	 not	 have	 enough	 berths	 for	 their	 luxury	 boats;	 they	 were	 frustrated
that	they	did	not	have	enough	entertainment	options.	They	shouted	that	nothing

worked	 in	 this	 country;	 complained	 that	 the	 entire	 establishment	 was	 corrupt
and	 urged	 me	 to	 do	 something	 for	 them	 to	 justify	 my	 rule.	 So	 I	 demolished
more	 huts,	 built	 more	 dams,	 displaced	 more	 poor	 farmers,	 and	 clogged	 my
cities	 in	 the	 process.	 I	 built	 bigger	 temples	 whethire	 god-men	 fleeced	 the
public,	and	wider	streets;	I	planted	flowers	so	that	the	people	who	did	not	have
a	meal	could	enjoy	the	beauty	of	the	flowers;	I	allowed	temples	of	debauchery
where	wine	and	women	were	tacky	and	spicy,	and	I	became	the	darling	of	the
middle	 class.	 I	 became	 intoxicated	 with	 their	 praise.	 They	 praised	 me	 for
development	 and	 I,	 stupid	 fool	 that	 I	 was,	 thought	 I	 was	 taking	 my	 country
forward.	I	saw	the	glitter	of	my	cities	and	closed	my	eyes	to	the	darkness	of	the
shadows	 where	misery	clung,	smelly	and	putrid.	I	 believed	 the	glitter	was	all
that	mattered.
Then	Rama	stood	at	our	gates	and	everything	changed.	When	the	enemy
came	 calling,	 the	 middle	 class	 vanished	 without	 a	 trace.	 They	 buried
themselves	 in	 their	 drawing	 rooms	 and	 hid	 their	 able	 bodied	 sons	 from	 the
State.	 The	 country	 had	 paid	 to	 have	 their	 children	 educated,	 in	 the	 hope	 that
when	the	country	needed	them,	they	would	render	their	bodies	and	minds	to	her
cause.	But	alas,	none	came	to	her	aid.	It	was	the	peasants	and	pavement	dwellers
who	 sacrificed	 their	 sons	 at	 the	 altar	 of	 patriotism.	 The	 foreign-educated,
Sanskrit-speaking,	 betel-chewing	 wealthy,	 gave	 me	 advise	 from	 their	 hiding
holes,	 but	 nothing	 else.	 The	 poor	 repaid	 the	 crumbs	 I	 had	 thrown	 their	 way
with	their	life-blood.	When	my	capital	city	burnt,	the	peasants	flocked	from	the
surrounding	 countryside	 to	 rebuild	 it.	 Some	 of	 them	 were	 looters	 who	 took
whatever	 they	 could	 lay	 their	 hands	 on,	 but	 for	 once	 I	 ordered	 my	 police	 to
look	the	other	way.
If	 I	 got	 a	 second	 chance,	 I	 would	 teach	 the	 rich	 a	 lesson.	 I	 would	 make
military	service	compulsory,	irrespective	of	whether	the	person	was	the	son	of
a	 rich	 merchant,	 ugly	 priest,	 or	 poor	 beggar.	 I	 would	 make	 it	 mandatory	 for
everyone	who	passed	out	of	the	technical	and	medical	schools,	to	serve	for	at
least	five	years	in	the	countryside.	I	would.	.	.what	did	it	matter?
That	 I	 was	 thinking	 these	 thoughts	 showed	 I	 was	 never	 to	 be	 given	 a
second	chance.	They	were	utopian	dreams	–	vestiges	of	my	own	lower	middle
class	 wishes,	 long-forgotten	 titbits	 of	 the	 shattered	 fantasies	 of	 my	 youth.
Power	would	corrupt	me	again	as	it	had	done	before.	Ideals	would	die	and	be
buried	 like	 they	 always	 had	 been.	 True	 wisdom	 lay	 in	 understanding	 that
idealism	was	just	a	tool	of	power.	I	could	die	tomorrow	or	Rama	could,	but	the
world	 would	 go	 on.	 The	 wretched	 would	 remain	 wretched,	 the	 poor	 would

remain	 poor.	 New	 revolutions	 could	 happen;	 new	 ideologies	 flourish;	 new
codes	of	ethics	and	morality	replace	the	old;	new	prophets	be	born;	new	kings
rule	the	earth;	new	religions	sprout	and	fight	each	other	and	new	discoveries
be	made,	but	everything	would	remain	the	same.	What	was	the	point	of	feeling
guilty?	 I	 did	 what	 I	 could.	 I	 could	 have	 done	 better,	 but	 then,	 who	 could	 not
have?
The	winner	of	the	battle	would	take	everything	–	fame,	money,	power.	He
would	be	the	truth,	for	whosoever	wins,	would	be	called	the	truth.	Bards	would
sing	paeans	about	the	victor.	As	time	passed,	legends	would	grow.	The	victor
would	become	the	paragon	of	virtue,	the	best	among	men.	Like	every	man,	he
too	would	commit	good	or	bad	deeds	in	life.	But	as	is	the	nature	of	the	world,
the	 good	 deeds	 of	 the	 victor	 would	 be	 exaggerated	 and	 the	 bad	 deeds
obliterated	from	memory.	And	if	the	doings	of	the	victor	could	not	be	justified
by	the	prevailing	moral	codes	of	society,	he	would	be	elevated	to	godhood,	for
who	 could	 question	 a	 God?	 In	 this	 way,	 my	 country	 produced	 many	 Gods.
Every	person	who	had	won	by	whatever	means,	had	become	a	God	or	avatar.
For	the	vanquished,	it	would	always	be	the	other	way	round.
Yet,	strangely	enough,	I	felt	that	none	of	this	concerned	me.	I	could	feel
my	 own	 insignificance	 within	 the	 higher	 order	 of	 things	 and	 that	 made	 me
curiously	self-centered.	If	I	did	not	matter	in	the	larger	order	of	life	and	was
just	an	insignificant	dot,	then	the	only	thing	thae	witht	mattered	to	me	was	me.
With	 my	 death,	 everything	 would	 end	 for	 me.	 What	 happened	 to	 my	 people
after	my	death	was	not	my	problem.	I	knew	that	death	would	be	the	final	halting
point	and	there	was	nothing	beyond.	No	atma,	no	heaven,	no	moksha,	no	hell,
no	God,	no	afterlife	awaited	me.	I	would	vanish,	earth	to	earth,	water	to	water,
air	to	air,	fire	to	fire,	and	everything	would	stop.	Yet,	given	a	choice,	I	would
have	loved	to	come	back	again.	Who	would	not?
I	 walked	 towards	 my	 garden	 where	 my	 obstinate	 daughter	 Sita	 was	 still
sulking.	I	wanted	to	see	my	daughter.	Then	if	time	permitted,	perhaps	I	could
spend	 a	 few	 minutes	 with	 Mandodari.	 Then	 I	 would	 meet	 Rama	 in	 the
battlefield,	face	to	face.

59	I	wish	you	death
Bhadra
Last	night,	by	the	time	I	had	reached	the	palace	gates,	the	food	distribution
was	over.	Everyone	knew	that	less	than	half	the	designated	quantity	reached	the
poor.	From	the	purchase	of	food	grains	from	the	farmers	to	final	distribution,
there	was	a	chain	of	swindling	and	racketeering.	The	farmer	in	turn	cheated	the
public	purchase	official	in	both	quantity	and	quality.	He	bribed	the	petty	clerks
who	 wrote	 the	 accounts	 to	 show	 larger	 quantities	 than	 the	 State	 actually
received.	 Then	 the	 official	 stole	 some	 of	 the	 grain	 and	 sold	 it	 in	 the	 black
market.	By	the	time	the	grain	reached	the	palace	warehouses,	there	were	such
glaring	gaps	between	book	stock	and	physical	stock,	that	the	supervisors	were
forced	to	buy	grain	from	the	black	market	at	double	the	price.	The	supervisors
then	fudged	the	accounts	to	show	some	loss	due	to	pestilence	and	used	the	state
treasury	to	buy	back	grain	from	the	black	market.	Since	the	supervisors	could
not	 be	 expected	 to	 pay	 for	 the	 shortfall,	 they	 fudged	 the	 number	 of	 the	 poor,
bloated	 the	 numbers	 of	 benefactors	 and	 swindled	 more	 grain	 in	 the	 process.
Bribes	 flowed	 thick	 and	 fast	 in	 all	 stages.	 Everyone	 who	 touched	 the	 grain
made	a	profit.
Idealistic	 ministers	 like	 Prahastha	 had	 been	 fooled	 by	 these	 crooks.	 He
had	 been	 happy	 about	 the	 welfare	 schemes	 he	 had	 initiated.	 Some	 others	 like
Jambumali,	used	the	system	to	their	advantage,	to	grow	immensely	rich.	And
wheeler	dealers	like	the	Varunas,	transported	huge	stashes	of	illegal	gold	and
cash	from	the	officials	of	the	empire	to	northern	countries.	It	was	a	vicious	but
meaningless	 cycle,	 where	 the	 only	 losers	 were	 those	 who	 were	 honest	 and
straight	forward.	Everybody	cheated	to	their	own	capacity.	And	everyone	was
aware	 what	 was	 happening.	 But,	 since	 everyone	 from	 the	 poor	 farmer	 who
cheated	 the	 government	 by	 under-reporting	 his	 yield;	 his	 farm	 worker,	 who

cheated	 the	 farmer	 himself	 whenever	 possible;	 to	 the	 clerks,	 merchants,
government	officers,	and	ministers	were	all	crooks	of	varying	capacity,	there
was	no	anger	among	the	people.	They	joked	about	the	corruption	in	the	system
and	 raved	 against	 the	 politicians.	 Baiting	 politicians	 became	 a	 major
amusement	for	the	Asuras.
So,	 though	 I	 was	 disappointed	 at	 not	 getting	 anything	 to	 eat,	 I	 was	 not
really	surprised.	In	fact,	I	was	relieved	that	the	distributing	clerk	had	not	been
overtly	rude	to	me.	He	just	told	me	to	get	lost	and	closed	the	shutters.	It	hurt	my
pride	every	time	I	had	to	beg	for	their	munificence,	but	I	had	learnt	long	ago
that	I	could	not	eat	my	pride.	I	decided	to	wait	under	my	favourite	Banyan	tree.
Maybe	tomorrow	I	could	be	first	in	the	queue	and	get	some	food.
The	war	not	far	from	ending	but	one	way	or	the	other,	it	had	to	end.	I	had
lost	many	my	acquaintances	and	friends	in	the	war.	I	had	cheered	for	our	side.
The	 loss	 of	 life	 was	 sad	 but	 necessary.	 Were	 we	 not	 fighting	 forway	 or	 a
cause?	 When	 others’	 sons	 were	 dying,	 I	 was	 there	 in	 the	 crowd	 to	 cheer	 the
martyrs.	When	death	visited	my	neighbours’	homes,	I	was	secretly	happy	that
my	family	was	intact	and	my	son	hale	and	healthy.	The	fear	remained	that	I	too
would	 lose	 my	 precious	 son	 one	 day.	 Yet,	 I	 foolishly	 hoped	 that	 God	 would
spare	me	the	horrible	death	of	my	child.	Had	I	not	suffered	enough?	Had	I	not
shared	whatever	little	I	earned	with	the	Gods	and	their	men?	I	had	helped	to	fill
the	coffers	of	the	temples	with	my	humble	offerings.	In	short,	I	had	bribed	the
gods.	 But	 they	 were	 our	 Gods	 and	 they	 were	 like	 us.	 They	 would	 accept	 our
bribes	 and	 offerings	 but	 there	 was	 no	 guarantee	 they	 would	 do	 us	 any	 good.
Life	 was	 a	 series	 of	 bribes	 –	 bribes	 paid	 to	 the	 Gods;	 to	 Godmen;	 to	 petty
officials;	to	government	servants;	to	the	King;	to	family;	to	friends.	From	birth
to	 death,	 our	 culture	 had	 trained	 us	 to	 bribe	 and	 to	 take	 bribes	 and	 endorse
bribes.
Athikaya’s	face	haunted	me.	However	hard	I	tried,	I	could	not	remember
him	as	a	baby.	But	I	remembered	little	incidents	that	had	made	life	liveable.	I
remembered	how	we	sang	songs	as	old	as	the	human	race;	how	I	carried	him
deep	into	the	dark	forests;	how	I	told	him	stories	in	which	Gods,	animals	and
white	 demons	 flitted	 in	 and	 out.	 How	 he	 would	 cling	 to	 my	 tattered	 mundu,
scared	 of	 the	 demons;	 how	 he	 would	 laugh	 at	 the	 pranks	 of	 the	 animals	 that
talked	 with	 Gods	 and	 men.	 I	 recalled	 the	 joy	 and	 feeling	 of	 contentment	 that
had	not	depended	on	a	fat	purse	and	a	mansion,	but	on	little	things	that	wove
their	magic.	Yet	I	could	not	recall	his	little	face.	The	face	I	saw	was	the	one	I
had	seen	on	his	funeral	pyre,	mauled	by	the	claws	of	fate,	smashed	on	the	hard

rock	 of	 racial	 hatred	 and	 crushed	 under	 the	 weight	 of	 prejudice.	 I	 wanted	 a
drink.	The	pain	was	too	great	to	bear.
I	lay	there	under	the	tree	with	raindrops	still	dripping	down	even	though	it
had	 stopped	 raining.	 Mosquitoes	 buzzed	 around	 and	 tried	 to	 squeeze	 out
whatever	blood	was	left	in	my	veins.	I	did	not	even	bother	to	swat	them.	There
were	 a	few	lights	in	the	street	 and	the	 palace	 itself	looked	gloomy	 and	ill	lit.
Somewhere	 an	 owl	 hooted	 and	 then	 after	 a	 few	 moments,	 another	 answered.
The	frogs	had	woken	after	the	rain	and	were	croaking	to	their	hearts’	content.
Crickets	 buzzed	 in	 the	 bushes,	 adding	 their	 own	 bizarre	 notes	 to	 the	 strange
symphony	that	was	being	played	around	me.	I	lay	there	imagining	that	sky	was
my	blanket	and	the	wet	earth	my	bed.	There	were	a	million	stars.	Were	they	the
gods?	 They	 seemed	 so	 far	 away,	 cold,	 indifferent	 and	 irrelevant	 –	 silent
witnesses	to	the	drama	unfolding	on	a	tiny	rock	called	earth.
There	was	the	frantic	cry	of	a	frog	in	its	death	throes.	Moments	before,	it
had	been	crying	for	its	mate,	hot	with	sex,	trying	to	fulfill	its	only	dharma	 in
life	 –	 propagation.	 And	 then	 fate	 interfered	 as	 a	 slithering	 snake,	 dark	 and
silent,	struck	with	its	poison.	But	the	strange	drama	of	birth,	propagation	and
death,	 repeated	 itself	 a	 million	 times	 all	 over	 the	 earth.	 In	 what	 way	 was	 the
death	of	my	son	or	a	king	any	more	significant	than	the	death	of	that	unknown
frog?	The	earth	had	its	claim	on	every	living	body.	Our	life	was	loaned	from
the	earth.	A	borrowed	life.	And	at	any	time,	earth	could	call	back	its	loan.
The	grief	for	my	lost	son	kept	coming	back	into	my	mind,	crushing	my
speculations	 on	 the	 philosophy	 of	 life.	 I	 clawed	 the	 wet,	 red	 earth	 with	 my
crooked	nails.	I	must	have	moaned	loudly	because	someone	came	near	me.	My
rheumatic	 eyes	 could	 barely	 discern	 the	 dark	 figure.	 I	 was	 terrified.	 ‘Was	 it
Yama,	the	God	of	death?’	It	was	inauspicious	to	even	think	about	death.	It	might
just	 come	 your	 way.	 I	 had	 been	 speculating	 about	 the	 irrelevance	 of	 death,
seeing	no	difference	between	the	life	of	my	son	and	a	frog,	just	a	few	seconds
ago.	So	when	the	dark	figure	loomed	over	me,	I	was	terrified	to	my	bones.	The
figure	stooped	and	put	its	dark,	crooked	fingers	under	my	nostrils.	I	held	my
breath.	 A	 wet	 palm	 felt	 the	 skin	 of	 my	 brow.	 Then	 the	 figure	 stood	 up	 and
called	out.	Two	soldiers	ran	towards	us.	‘Was	I	getting	arrested?’	My	feverish
brain	frantically	searched	for	the	crime	I	might	have	committed.
“He	is	dying.	He	is	running	a	very	high	fever.”	A	craggy	face,	with	a	long
flowing	 white	 beard,	 loomed	 near	 my	 face.	 I	 was	 relieved.	 It	 was	 that	 mad
scientist,	Mayan.	The	guy	was	eccentric	but	totally	harmless.	“Carry	him	inside
the	fort.”	I	heard	him	say.

“But	sir,	he	is	a	drunkard.	Should	we.	.	.”	There	was	annoyance	and	a	jeer
in	the	soldier ’s	voice.
“He	 is	 dying	 and	 needs	 medical	 help.	 Take	 him	 inside.	 The	 poor	 man
could	be	starving.	This	bloody	war.	.	.why	do	people	kill	each	other?	Saturn	is
on	the	ascendant.	Mars	is	very	powerful	now.	If	I	could	develop	a	machine	eye
that	would	enable	me	to	see	the	planets	more	clearly.	.	.	Is	there	any	relationship
between	the	millions	of	planets	and	human	fate?	There	are	lakhs	of	planets	and
stars.	.	.we	are	just	specks	sitting	in	this	vast	ocean	of	planets.	.	.”
I	could	hear	his	voice	getting	fainter	as	the	mad	scientist	walked	away	into
his	own	world.	I	could	not	make	head	or	tail	of	what	he	had	been	blabbering
about.	The	soldiers	 stood	there	hesitating.	They	clearly	did	not	want	to	touch
me.	I	reeked	like	a	pig.	But	they	could	not	afford	to	defy	the	orders	of	a	senior
minister.	Probably	Mayan	had	forgotten	all	about	me	by	then,	but	it	was	a	risk
for	the	poor	soldiers	to	take.	I	could	see	them	faintly	as	I	swam	in	and	out	of
consciousness.	 I	 found	 myself	 half-dragged	 and	 half-lifted	 by	 the	 soldiers
towards	 the	 fort.	 They	 dumped	 me	 near	 the	 gate	 and	 there	 was	 an	 angry
consultation	with	the	watch	captain,	who	did	not	want	anything	to	do	with	me
and	denied	us	entry.	So	I	was	dumped	in	a	corner	near	the	moat	and	lay	there
without	 the	 strength	 to	 even	 lift	 my	 head.	 It	 was	 much	 later,	 after	 mosquitoes
had	grown	fat	with	my	blood	and	worms	and	insects	had	burrowed	their	way
into	my	skin,	that	Mayan	returned	from	his	wanderings.
“Ah	good,	good!	You	have	brought	him	eh?	Take	him	to	the	verandah	of
my	quarters.	I	will	try	to	save	him.”	Maya	ordered	the	hapless	captain	and	went
away.
The	captain	cursed	me,	his	job,	the	minister,	and	life,	for	ten	full	minutes
after	 the	 scientist	 had	 left.	 Then	 he	 gave	 orders	 that	 I	 be	 taken	 to	 Mayan’s
verandah.	I	was	so	weak	that	they	had	to	carry	me	the	whole	way.	Like	a	sack	of
coconuts,	 they	 dumped	 me	 on	 the	 cool,	 polished	 and	 clean	 verandah.	 After	 a
while	 the	 scientist	 came	 out	 with	 an	 assistant	 and	 some	 evil	 smelling	 liquid.
The	assistant	closed	my	nostrils	with	his	fingers	and	when	I	gasped	for	breath,
the	bitter	liquid	was	emptied	into	my	open	mouth.	Mayan	shut	my	mouth	before
I	could	gag	and	the	fiery	liquid	burned	a	fiery	path	into	my	stomach.	I	writhed
with	 pain	 and	 convulsed,	 terrified	 that	 I	 was	 dying.	 The	 two	 men	 held	 my
twisting	body	till	I	lost	all	my	strength	and	slipped	into	unconsciousness.
When	 I	 opened	 my	 eyes	 I	 had	 a	 splitting	 headache	 and	 felt	 drowsy	 and
tired	but	much	better	than	the	previous	day.	Maybe	the	old	man	Mayan,	knew	a
thing	or	two	about	medicine.	I	stood	up	slowly	and	found	that	some	food	and	a

tumbler	of	buttermilk	had	been	placed	nearby.	I	grabbed	the	food	and	gobbled
it	up	as	fast	as	I	could.	Strength	returned	to	my	limbs.	I	wanted	to	thank	the	old
man	and	go	home	as	early	as	possible	but	he	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.	I	did	not
have	the	courage	knock	on	the	imposing,	tall	door.	These	were	important	men
and	 I	 was	 too	 insignificant	 to	 go	 knocking	 at	 the	 doors	 of	 the	 mighty	 and
powerful.	Forget	the	old	man,	I	just	wanted	to	get	out	of	the	place.
As	 I	 was	 about	 to	 leave,	 I	 saw	 the	 King,	 Ravana,	 walking	 towards	 the
Ashoka	 tree	 where	 Sita	 had	 camping	 adamantly.	 Strange,	 he	 was	 alone	 and
walking	fast.	I	wondered	what	the	King	was	up	to	and	followed	him,	careful	to
move	 stealthily.	 By	the	time	I	had	hidden	behind	a	bush	 of	 Jasmine,	the	 King
stood	mutely	before	his	daughter.	I	shivered	at	the	thought	of	the	terrifying	past
that	connected	me	with	Ravana,	Sita	and	Vedavathi.	Here,	in	front	of	me,	was
that	 little	 bundle	 I	 had	 been	 entrusted	 to	 kill	 years	 ago.	 The	 memories	 were
vivid.	Father	and	daughter	glared	at	each	other	with	unmitigated	animosity	and
hatred.	She	had	ruined	his	dream.	And	he	had	dragged	the	future	of	an	entire
empire	 into	 the	 mud	 because	 of	 her.	 I	 should	 have	 killed	 her	 when	 she	 lay
throbbing	in	my	dark	hands	three	decades	ago.	It	would	have	been	so	easy	to
close	her	nostrils	and	choke	her	to	death.	Instead,	I	felt	pity	for	the	little	one.
Fool	that	I	was.	I	should	have	stayed	away	from	their	business	or	gone	the	full
measure	and	committed	murder	like	Rudraka	or	Dhumraksha.
“I	love	my	husband	and	whatever	you	say	will	not	sway	me	from	my	love
for	him.”	She	glowered	with	indignation.
“To	hell	with	your	Rama.	I	do	not	want	to	kill	the	fool.	I	do	not	want	his
blood	 on	 my	 hands.	 Already	 people	 are	 accusing	 me	 of	 murdering
Soorpanakha’s	husband.	I	do	not	want	any	more	blood	on	my	hands.	But	your
husband	 is	 stupid	 and	 evil.	 Why	 do	 you	 want	 to	 lead	 a	 slave’s	 life	 with	 him?
Deva	men	treat	their	women	like	beasts	of	burden.”
“What	 do	 you	 know	 about	 Deva	 culture?	 Women	 are	 worshipped	 as
Goddesses.	Our	world	is	a	far	cry	from	yours.	Here	women	have	no	morals.
They	 move	 around	 unveiled.	 Men	 and	 women	 mix	 freely	 and	 there	 is	 no
sanctity	to	marriage	in	your	kingdom.	Your	women	are	loud.	They	drink	and
dance	 with	 men.	 Your	 world	 is	 uncouth,	 with	 women	 marrying	 men	 of	 their
choice,	 instead	 of	 being	 obedient	 daughters	 to	 their	 fathers.	 Your	 women	 are
pretentious	and	think	they	are	the	most	intelligent	creatures	in	the	world.	You
are	just	creatures	of	pleasure.	Your	men	are	like	women.	A	monkey-man	burnt
down	this	hateful	city	of	sin.	And	what	did	your	mighty	army	do?	Look	at	the
kind	 of	 women	 you	 people	 have	 produced.	 Look	 at	 your	 sister,	 how

promiscuous	she	is.	Look	at	this	dirty,	dark,	fat	and	ugly	Trijata,	your	niece.	.
.and	you	want	me	to	live	here,	leaving	my	Rama.	.	.”
I	seethed	with	anger.	Trijata,	who	stood	a	few	feet	away,	burst	into	sobs.
She	 had	 been	 a	 friend	 and	 companion	 to	 Sita	 since	 the	 day	 she	 had	 been
brought	 to	 Lanka.	 It	 was	 for	 her	 that	 Ravana	 was	 losing	 his	 empire	 and	 his
dreams.	It	was	for	Sita	that	so	many	poor	Asuras	had	died.	I	could	have	choked
her	to	death	at	that	moment.
Ravana	stamped	a	foot	and	drew	his	sword	from	its	sheath	in	great	anger.
“You.	.	.you.	.	.	I	had	staked	everything	for	you.	I	have	lost	my	sons,	my	honour,
my	city.	.	.	everything,	so	that	my	daughter	could	be	happy.	And	this	is	what	you
say?	I	sacrificed	thousands	of	men	for	your	sake.”	He	raised	his	sword	and	I
anticipated	the	swift	swoosh	of	the	sword	severing	the	head	of	that	hateful	Deva
woman.	 She	 looked	 at	 her	 father,	 unfazed,	 her	 eyes	 taunting	 and	 challenging
the	great	Asura	Emperor	to	behead	her.	Ravana’s	sword	came	within	an	inch	of
her	throat	but	stopped	dead	there.	Then	slowly	the	strong	arm	of	Ravana	that
had	severed	many	enemy	heads	over	the	past	four	decades,	went	limp.	“Sita.	.
.you	 are	 my	 daughter.	 .	 .”	 the	 King	 muttered	 as	 the	 famous	 Chandrahasa	 fell
onto	the	red	earth	of	Lanka.
A	 jeering	 laugh	 was	 the	 answer.	 “Daughter!	 A	 daughter	 who	 could	 be
thrown	away	when	inconvenient?	A	daughter	your	people	never	wanted?	And
what	a	father!”
I	wanted	to	leave	my	hiding	place	and	grab	that	obnoxious	woman	by	her
hair,	but	to	my	shock	and	surprise,	I	saw	Ravana	stand	with	his	head	bowed.	He
stood	with	silent	tears	flowing	from	his	reddened	eyes.	Then	slowly	he	turned
and	walked	back	to	his	palace.
“I	 wish	 you	 death!	 A	 painful	 and	 prolonged	 one.”	 shouted	 Sita,	 as	 the
King	of	the	Asuras	walked	away	with	heavy	steps.
Ravana	aged	ten	years	before	my	eyes.	Death	awaited	the	old	King,	and	as
wished	and	prayed	for	by	his	daughter	–	a	long	prolonged	and	painful	one.	I
wanted	no	part	of	this	bloody,	family	feud,	between	father,	daughter,	and	sonin-law.	But	what	choice	did	people	like	me	have,	or	had	ever	had?

60	End	of	a	dream
Ravana
I	 started	 out	to	the	 battlefield	in	a	depressed	mood.	Mandodari	had	 been
emotional.	 She	 had	 not	 wanted	 me	 to	 go.	 She	 asked	 me	 to	 hand	 Sita	 over	 to
Rama	 and	 appeal	 for	 peace.	 Peace.	 .	 .a	 word	 for	 cowards.	 ‘Women!	 They	 will
never	understand	reason.’	 I	 had	 to	 literally	 prise	 her	 away	 from	 my	 body	 as
she	shouted,	cried,	tore	her	hair	and	beat	her	breasts.	That	too,	in	front	of	all
my	soldiers.	It	was	embarrassing.	She	accused	me	of	sacrificing	everyone	for
my	 pride.	 She	 cursed	 Sita	 and	 I	 became	 angry.	 I	 shouted	 back	 and	 threw	 a
tantrum	that	cowed	the	poor	woman.	She	was	still	to	recover	from	the	shock	of
losing	her	son	and	I	should	not	have	behaved	so	harshly	with	her.	’But	then	I
have	always	behaved	badly	to	her.	Why	just	her,	to	all	the	women	in	my	life.’
In	my	anger,	I	broke	my	Veena	into	two.	I	had	loved	music	and	I	did	not
want	any	monkey-man	playing	with	my	instrument	after	I	had	gone.	I	had	tried
to	codify	the	ragas	and	lyrics	I	had	composed.	Hopefully,	they	would	survive
me	 and	 my	 empire.	 I	 had	 experimented	 with	 paediatric	 medicine	 and
astronomy	and	meticulously	jotted	down	my	notes	on	palm	leaves.	Those	I	had
sent	 to	 Mayan.	 Perhaps	 that	 mad	 man	 would	 have	 some	 use	 for	 them.	 By	 the
time	I	put	on	my	battle	dress,	she	had	shut	herself	in	her	chamber.	I	called	to
her	many	times	but	she	would	not	open	the	door.	Finally,	cursing	her,	I	turned
and	walked	towards	my	chariot.	I	heard	her	open	the	door	and	come	running	to
me,	calling	my	name	piteously.	I	did	not	turn	back.	I	was	afraid	to	look	at	her
face	 again.	 All	 my	 arrogance	 and	 false	 confidence	 would	 have	 melted,	 and	 I
would	 have	 become	 just	 the	 average,	 middle-aged,	 pot-bellied,	 balding
husband	of	a	good	and	kind-hearted	woman	instead	of	the	King	of	the	Asuras.	I
knew	 that	 if	 I	 turned	 to	 look	 at	 her	 face,	 all	 my	 resolve	 would	 vanish	 and	 I
would	succumb	and	follow	her	bidding.	I	jumped	into	the	chariot	and	barked	to

my	charioteer	to	proceed.
As	the	fort	gates	opened	and	my	army	rushed	forward	to	meet	the	Devas,
I	tried	hard	to	suppress	the	melancholy	feeling	of	a	life	wasted,	of	what	could
have	 been.	 I	 left	 behind	 a	 lonely	 woman	 who	 had	 suffered	 me	 and	 my	 antics
silently	for	more	than	three	and	half	decades;	a	woman	who	had	sacrificed	her
children	 in	 a	 useless	 war	 started	 by	 her	 foolish	 husband	 because	 of	 his
unbridled	 passion;	 a	 woman	 who	 had	 the	 courage	 to	 question	 the	 man	 the
world	feared.	Tears	welled	in	my	eyes.	I	loved	my	wife	more	than	anything	in
the	world.	I	should	have	said	good	bye	to	her.	Now	it	was	too	late.	Rama	was
waiting.
I	 looked	 around	 and	 saw	 the	 glistening,	 sweating,	 bare,	 black	 bodies,
bobbing	around	me.	How	many	of	them	would	return	alive	today?	How	many
wives	 would	 be	 widowed	 by	 evening?	 How	 many	 of	 these	 poor	 souls	 would
wet	the	red	soil	of	Lanka	with	their	blood?	How	many	children	would	be	made
orphans?	For	whose	sake	were	these	fools	fighting?	How	easy	was	it	to	fool
these	 poor	 bastards.	 Far	 away	 on	 the	 beach,	 Rama’s	 army	 lay	 waiting.	 What
were	the	monkey-men	were	fighting	for?	For	the	sake	of	some	northern	prince
and	his	wife?	None	of	those	poor	bastards	had	even	seen	Rama’s	wife	and	they
had	no	enmity	with	the	Asuras.	But	they	came,	ready	to	die.	Many	among	them
would	also	leave	their	little	ones	orphaned	or	their	parents	without	shelter.
Rama’s	army	erupted	with	loud	shouts	as	we	turned	the	corner	and	raced
towards	them.	I	had	placed	my	elephants	at	the	front.	It	was	a	gamble.	Elephants
were	notoriously	undependable.	They	could	turn	around	and	create	a	stampede
among	my	men.	But	I	did	not	have	much	choice.	My	ranks	had	dwindled	and
Varuna’s	 navy	 was	 pounding	 my	 forts	 with	 huge	 stones	 from	 the	 sea.	 I	 had
positioned	 my	 flame-throwers	 strategically	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 low	 hills
overlooking	the	beach.	Because	of	the	height,	they	were	out	of	reach	of	Rama’s
archers	 or	 Varuna’s	 catapults	 and	 could	 reach	 their	 targets	 much	 more
accurately.	 They	 kept	 the	 Vanara	 army	 at	 bay	 and	 sunk	 many	 catamarans	 and
boats	 with	 their	 flame-throwing.	 As	 my	 elephants	 thundered	 towards	 the
Vanaras,	I	could	sense	a	ripple	of	fear	go	through	the	enemy	ranks.	They	tore
through	the	feeble	Vanara	ranks,	smashing	and	trampling	many	underfoot.	The
Asura	army	charged	and	the	cavalry	surrounded	the	Vanaras	on	three	sides.
It	 had	 been	 a	 long	 time	 since	 I	 had	 led	 a	 battle	 from	 the	 front	 and	 I
wondered	 if	 I	 had	 lost	 my	 touch.	 But	 the	 sight	 of	 Rama’s	 army	 panicking
pumped	 the	 blood	 in	 my	 veins.	 Suddenly	 I	 was	 not	 an	 old	 and	 tired	 king
nearing	six	decades	of	life,	I	was	once	again	that	sixteen-year-old,	with	passion

and	 ambition	 burning	 in	 my	 veins.	 What	 was	 Rama	 after	 all	 but	 a	 mere	 hotheaded	young	man	who	had	somehow	arranged	a	hotchpotch	of	semi-civilized
tribes	to	challenge	the	mightiest	Emperor	on	earth.	Today,	I	would	ensure	that
he	became	an	example	to	all	those	arrogant	hot	heads	who	thought	they	could
ride	rough	over	the	Asura	Emperor	and	get	away	safely	to	their	homes.
I	 barked	 commands	 and	 runners	 were	 dispatched	 to	 all	 sides.	 With
satisfaction,	I	saw	that	Rama	was	in	real	distress.	His	captains	put	up	a	brave	yet
futile	fight.	If	I	could	get	him	and	pierce	that	throat	with	a	well	aimed	arrow,
this	 foolish	 war	 would	 end.	 I	 asked	 my	 charioteer	 to	 drive	 through	 the	 left
flank.	Arrows	fell	thick	and	fast.	It	was	dangerous	but	I	was	in	a	giddy	mood.
Anger	 and	 enthusiasm	 pumped	 through	 my	 veins	 and	 nothing	 could	 stop	 me
from	 getting	 him.	 This	 would	 be	 the	 last	 time	 a	 Deva	 prince	 would	 dare	 to
challenge	an	Asura	king.
Suddenly	I	was	swamped	by	men	running	in	panic	from	the	rear.	I	cried
myself	 hoarse	 and	 asked	 them	 regroup.	 Rama	 had	 laid	 a	 trap.	 We	 had	 been
ambushed	from	behind,	with	Vibhishana	leading	a	cavalry	charge	from	the	city
end,	trying	to	put	pressure	on	my	rear.	I	sent	runners	to	the	hilltop	to	command
them	to	aim	the	fire	at	the	rear	of	our	formation.	The	firing	could	catch	some
of	my	own	people,	but	that	was	inevitable.	We	were	being	trapped	between	the
retreating,	 yet	 fiercely	 fighting	 Vanaras	 from	 the	 sea,	 and	 Vibhishana’s	 army
from	the	land.	I	divided	my	cavalry	and	ordered	a	group	to	engage	Vibhishana.
This	relieved	the	pressure	from	the	rear.	I	rued	the	fact	that	I	had	lost	all	my
experienced	commanders.	I	had	underestimated	Rama.	I	should	have	taken	the
war	 to	 the	 Vanara	 country	 the	 moment	 Hanuman	 came	 and	 burnt	 down	 my
capital.	But	we	had	been	too	complacent.	Had	I	done	that	earlier,	we	could	have
smashed	the	Vanaras	and	taken	Rama	prisoner.	Instead,	he	was	leading	the	war
against	my	empire	and	I	was	struggling	to	contain	him.	Today,	I	would	finish
him.
Both	 armies	 fought	 with	 desperation	 and	 courage.	 Heroes	 and	 martyrs
were	created	every	minute.	Soon,	Lankini’s	Asura	army	attacked	our	position
on	top	of	the	hills.	Wave	upon	wave	of	her	soldiers	attacked	my	soldiers	on	the
hilltop.	I	sensed	danger.	We	were	outnumbered	six	to	one.	It	meant	that	we	had
to	kill	six	enemy	soldiers	for	each	of	our	soldier	being	killed,	just	to	keep	our
position.	 The	 other	 way	 was	 to	 capture	 or	 kill	 the	 enemy	 commander.	 But	 I
could	not	see	where	Rama	was.	Hanuman	was	commanding	and	leading	from
the	front.	I	looked	for	Rama	and	Lakshmana,	but	could	not	find	them	at	all.	The
battle	raged	on	with	no	clear	victory	for	either	side.

It	was	almost	three	in	the	afternoon	and	both	sides	had	lost	many	men.	My
ranks	 had	 dwindled,	 though	 the	 civilian	 and	 untrained	 population	 of	 my	 city
had	joined	my	ranks	with	whatever	they	could	lay	their	hands	on.	They	were	no
match	for	the	highly	trained	Vanara	warriors,	but	from	a	distance,	I	was	sure
that	 my	 civilians	 looked	 menacing	 to	 the	 Vanaras.	 It	 was	 also	 good	 for	 our
morale	and	bad	news	for	the	enemy,	as	they	could	not	see	any	dwindling	of	the
Asura	 ranks.	 But	 I	 had	 no	 doubt	 that	 this	 situation	 could	 not	 go	 on	 forever.
Already	two	or	three	hilltops	had	been	captured	by	Lankini’s	soldiers	and	they
were	 now	 training	 their	 fire	 on	 us.	 Our	 elephants	 had	 managed	 to	 smash	 the
enemy	 lines	 and	 tear	 off	 portions	 of	 the	 bridge.	 Many	 of	 Varuna’s	 boats	 had
been	captured	by	my	enthusiastic	troops	and	we	opened	another	front	from	the
sea.	The	battle	hung	in	precarious	balance.
Time	was	running	out.	Dark	clouds	formed	in	the	western	sky	and	the	sea
was	 getting	 choppy.	 Varuna’s	 vessels	 bobbed	 up	 and	 down	 in	 the	 rough	 sea.
The	elephants	were	getting	restless	and	I	was	afraid	that	at	any	moment	things
would	change	for	the	worse.	I	had	to	do	something	daring	and	dramatic.	‘But
where	was	Rama	and	Lakshmana?’	My	best	chance	would	be	to	lead	a	surprise
attack	towards	the	Deva	prince	and	capture	or	kill	him.	Like	him,	I	too	was	well
hidden	from	enemy	eyes.	As	a	part	of	the	deception,	more	than	seven	chariots
flew	the	royal	Asura	flag	to	confuse	the	enemy	as	to	which	was	my	chariot.	I
became	desperate.	My	age	was	catching	up	with	me.	A	few	arrows	had	struck
me	and	I	was	exhausted	from	the	bleeding.
As	the	first	bolts	of	lightning	hit	the	sea,	I	saw	them.	They	were	near	the
bridge.	 They	 were	 urging	 the	 Vanaras	 to	 rebuild	 it.	 Hanuman	 had	 lit	 a	 huge
wall	 of	 fire	 that	 kept	 the	 elephants	 at	 bay.	 As	 the	 wind	 shifted	 and	 flame	 wall
moved,	I	saw	Varuna’s	master	vessel	moving	towards	the	bridge.	With	horror	I
saw	 reinforcements	 arriving	 to	 help	 Rama.	 Horses	 were	 being	 lowered	 and
warriors	 slid	 down	 the	 ropes	 towards	 the	 bridge.	 Our	 men	 directed	 their
arrows	 towards	 the	 slithering	 Vanara	 warriors	 but	 the	 enemy	 numbers	 were
growing	quickly.	To	my	rear,	Vibhishana	was	butchering	my	civilian	fighters
and	 advancing.	 My	 time	 was	 running	 out.	 Unless	 I	 killed	 Rama	 before	 I	 got
totally	swamped,	everything	would	be	finished.
I	assembled	my	best	fighters	and	formed	a	rapid	action	team.	I	told	them
the	 plan	 and	 was	 annoyed	 to	 see	 the	 look	 of	 fear	 in	 their	 eyes.	 The	 plan
required	extreme	daring	in	its	execution.	But	I	explained	that	the	situation	was
desperate	 and	 without	 waiting	 for	 their	 confirmation,	 I	 jumped	 out	 of	 my
chariot	with	my	favourite	sword	in	my	hand.	I	unshackled	my	favourite	horse.

My	charioteer	was	in	tears	and	I	hugged	him.	He	collapsed	weeping	like	an	old
woman	 at	 my	 feet.	 Ignoring	 him,	 I	 jumped	 onto	 my	 horse	 and	 raised	 my
Chandrahasa	to	the	darkening	skies	and	bellowed,	“Har	Har	Mahadev”.
All	 around	 me	 the	 war	 cry	 echoed	 from	 a	 hundred	 tongues.	 Lightning
struck	here	and	there	as	massive	waves	smashed	the	boulders	on	the	beach.	It
was	 almost	 dark	 and	 rain	 fell	 in	 huge	 drops.	 I	 galloped	 towards	 the	 wall	 of
flame,	 past	 the	 slain	 soldiers	 lying	 on	 the	 wet	 ground,	 past	 the	 writhing	 men
with	torn	limbs,	over	the	dying	men,	past	pools	of	blood	and	trampled	flesh,	I
galloped	towards	Rama.	My	men	thundered	behind	me.	Blood	pounded	in	my
ears.	I	could	feel	the	reins	tremble.	My	horse	frothed	from	it’s	nose	but	I	egged
it	 on.	 Faster	 and	 faster	 I	 galloped,	 ignoring	 the	 odd	 arrows	 that	 struck	 my
thighs	or	biceps.	I	could	feel	the	heat	and	my	horse	hesitated,	but	I	kicked	her
into	galloping	faster.	With	one	mighty	swoop	she	jumped	through	the	wall	of
fire	towards	Rama.	My	men	followed	me	and	we	landed	in	front	of	the	terrified
Vanaras.	My	hair	and	the	mane	of	my	horse	had	caught	fire	and	I	could	see	the
terror	my	figure	had	struck.
I	could	see	his	eyes.	Even	at	that	moment,	my	feelings	were	of	surprise.
‘How	dark	skinned	he	was.’	He	staggered	back	with	a	look	of	absolute	terror.
As	 I	 raised	 my	 sword	 to	 thrust	 it	 through	 his	 heart,	 Hanuman	 jumped	 up	 and
grabbed	 my	 legs.	 I	 lost	 my	 balance	 and	 fell	 from	 my	 horse.	 I	 kicked	 at	 the
monkey-man’s	 face.	 With	 a	 grunt	 he	 fell	 into	 the	 sea.	 I	 scrambled	 up	 and
hacked	 my	 way	 towards	 Rama	 and	 Lakshmana.	 They	 were	 shooting	 arrows
indiscriminately	and	had	hit	some	of	their	own	soldiers,	though	a	few	arrows
managed	to	hit	some	of	my	troops	also.	We	advanced	faster	towards	the	Deva
princes,	 when	 the	 skies	 opened	 in	 a	 flood.	 Rain	 pounded	 down	 on	 all	 of	 us,
making	 movements	 slippery	 and	 cumbersome.	 Gigantic	 waves	 crashed	 onto
the	 bridge	 and	 carried	 away	 many	 men	 from	 both	 sides.	 A	 portion	 of	 the
bridge	collapsed,	cutting	off	Rama	and	a	few	of	his	men	from	their	main	army.
He	was	trapped.	I	just	had	to	reach	him.	He	was	finished.	With	renewed	vigor,
we	fought	our	way	towards	Rama.
That	was	the	moment	I	thought	the	war	was	finished	and	I	had	won.	Once
again,	 with	 pluck	 and	 determination,	 I	 had	 managed	 to	 turn	 my	 luck.	 Many
times	 in	 the	 past	 I	 had	 led	 my	 troops	 to	 victory	 from	 seemingly	 impossible
positions.	This	was	just	 one	of	 those.	In	a	 few	minutes	Rama	and	Lakshmana
would	join	my	brother	Kumbha	in	the	deep	sea.	I	could	see	fear	on	their	faces.
Their	heavy	bows	were	slipping	from	their	hands	as	waves	pounded	the	bridge
and	 sprayed	 the	 fighting	 men	 with	 salt	 water.	 The	 wind	 howled	 and	 lightning

cracked	in	the	dark	skies.	Rama’s	hands	trembled	and	he	was	not	able	to	aim
accurately.	 Arrows	 whizzed	 past	 me,	 but	 in	 my	 frenzy	 I	 did	 not	 even	 bother
about	 an	 accidental	 one	 striking	 me.	 I	 hacked	 my	 way	 towards	 my	 enemy.
Countless	Vanaras	fell	dead	as	the	rain	lashed	us	and	the	bridge	shuddered.	A
few	 more	 men	 to	 slaughter	 and	 I	 could	 severe	 the	 head	 of	 Rama	 with	 my
Chandrahasa.	I	relished	the	thought.
It	was	far	too	late	to	realize	the	fatal	mistake	I	had	made.	In	leaping	across
the	 firewall	 built	 by	 Hanuman,	 I	 had	 assumed	 that	 there	 was	 nothing	 to	 fear
from	 my	 rear.	 In	 my	 rage	 against	 Rama,	 I	 had	 made	 a	 fundamental	 error	 of
judgment.	The	torrential	rain	had	managed	to	kill	the	fire	and	now	my	rear	lay
wide	 open	 to	 attack.	 I	 had	 forgotten	 my	 brother	 Vibhishana,	 who	 had	 been
fighting	his	way	towards	me.	With	no	fire	to	stop	him,	he	had	stealthily	reached
me.	 It	 was	 only	 when	 his	 sword	 thrust	 deep	 into	 my	 back	 that	 I	 realized	 my
folly.
I	turned	and	tried	to	attack	him	with	my	sword,	but	he	ducked	and	I	lost
my	balance.	He	kicked	me	and	I	almost	fell	into	the	raging	sea.	I	recovered	my
balance	 but	 blood	 poured	 from	 the	 wound	 he	 had	 inflicted.	 My	 hands	 went
numb.	The	heavy	armour	I	wore	pulled	me	down.	Rama	and	Lakshmana,	seized
the	 opportunity	 to	 shower	 me	 with	 arrows.	 But	 the	 arrows	 bounced	 off	 my
armour	and	could	not	penetrate	it.	I	did	not	have	any	time	to	lose.	I	was	about	to
pass	out.	I	had	to	get	to	Rama	before	I	became	too	weak.	I	kicked	Vibhishana
and	he	fell	into	the	sea.	As	I	rushed	towards	Rama	with	my	sword	held	high,
Vibhishana	 somehow	 scrambled	 back	 on	 the	 bridge.	 I	 did	 not	 notice	 it.	 My
mind	 was	 totally	 focused	 on	 Rama.	 As	 I	 leapt	 forward,	 Vibhishana’s	 sword
once	again	fell	on	my	back.	The	sword	missed	my	body	by	an	inch	but	severed
the	knots	that	held	my	armour	tight	against	my	body.	Instinctively	I	turned	back
and	 kicked	 Vibhishana.	 He	 vanished	 into	 the	 raging,	 swirling	 sea	 water.	 As	 I
turned	again	to	face	Rama,	my	armour	fell	and	I	stood	exposed	to	my	enemy’s
arrows.
Rama	seized	the	opportunity	and	aimed	at	my	abdomen.	I	did	not	want	to
give	 up	 but	 the	 blood	 dripping	 from	 my	 body	 made	 my	 head	 spin.	 My	 steps
faltered	 and	 my	 advance	 became	 painfully	 slow.	 When	 arrow	 upon	 arrow
pierced	my	guts,	my	only	thought	was	of	open	defiance.	With	each	painful	step,
another	bout	of	arrows	ripped	my	bare	body.	Slowly,	I	fell	and	the	last	thing	I
remembered	was	being	swallowed	by	a	dark	green	wave.	Then	my	world	went
blank.

When	I	opened	my	eyes,	there	was	a	deathly	silence.	The	earth	was	dark
and	cold.	Some	men	were	standing	around	me,	but	I	could	not	see	their	faces.
Then	a	tall,	dark	figure	came	and	stood	near	my	head.	‘Rama.	.	.’	I	wanted	to
grab	him	by	his	throat	but	the	earth	held	me	firm.	She	was	about	to	reclaim	my
body.	Rama	mumbled	something	in	Sanskrit,	something	about	finding	a	place
in	 heaven.	 I	 wanted	 to	 burst	 out	 laughing.	 In	 mock	 obeisance,	 I	 brought	 my
palms	together.	The	last	thought	before	I	passed	out	again	was	that	the	fool	had
believed	I	was	doing	obeisance	to	him.	My	macabre	joke	had	been	lost	on	him.
Men	and	their	blasted	egos!

61	Victors	and	their	ways
Bhadra
Today	is	his	funeral.	It	was	late	afternoon	and	I	stood	amidst	the	crowd,
dozing	in	the	humid	heat.	There	was	a	lingering	sadness	and	terror	in	the	air.
The	 conquering	 armies	 had	 entered	 the	 city	 last	 night.	 The	 Vanaras	 had
pillaged,	raped,	and	looted	the	way	through	the	city.	Most	people	had	fled	to	the
jungles	while	some	had	bravely	tried	to	defend	their	small	possessions.	Others
surrendered	 to	 the	 ravaging	 Vanara	 army	 but	 they	 were	 in	 no	 mood	 to	 take
prisoners.	 The	 fools	 who	 expected	 mercy	 were	 cut	 down	 mercilessly.	 The
granaries	were	torched	and	the	temples	looted.	Ravana’s	impressive	palace	was
almost	 pulled	 down,	 but	 Vibhishana	 intervened	 and	 ensured	 that	 everyone
inside	 the	 fort	 was	 safe.	 So	 once	 again	 the	 nobles	 saved	 their	 skins	 and
possessions.	The	Vanara	plunderers	were	let	loose	on	the	hapless	common	folk
of	Lanka.
By	mid-morning,	a	semblance	of	order	had	come	and	many	poor	Asuras
were	 captured	 from	 the	 surrounding	 jungles	 by	 the	 Vanara	 soldiers	 and
brought	forcefully	back	to	the	city.	Last	night	I	had	sneaked	into	the	beach	to
foray	for	any	valuables	left	by	the	slain	soldiers.	It	was	risky,	but	it	was	easy
money.	Besides,	it	was	a	safe	place	to	be.	It	would	have	been	the	last	place	they
would	 have	 expected	 an	 Asura	 to	 be.	 Two	 or	 three	 other	 men	 like	 me
scavenged	 for	 valuables	 among	 the	 dead	 or	 gravely	 injured,	 but	 we	 kept	 a
discreet	distance	from	each	other.
It	was	then	that	I	stumbled	upon	the	Emperor	himself.	In	the	dull	glow	of	a
moonless	 night,	 I	 recognized	 my	 King	 and	 master.	 He	 was	 breathing	 heavily
and	writhing	in	pain.	Jackals	were	eating	him	alive.	It	was	the	shimmer	of	gold
from	his	bracelets	that	had	attracted	me	to	him.	I	was	not	sure	initially,	but	as	I
leaned	 to	 have	 a	 look,	 he	 emitted	 a	 grunt.	 ‘How	 the	 mighty	 had	 fallen.’	 This

man	 had	 fought	 for	 a	 race	 and	 a	 people	 who	 had	 lost	 their	 dignity,	 their
freedom,	 their	 values,	 and	 their	 culture,	 to	 foreigners	 who	 had	 invaded	 and
conquered	 them.	 Ravana	 gave	 the	 Asuras	 dignity	 and	 self-belief,	 instilled
confidence	 and	 pride	 in	 our	 ancient	 culture	 and	 took	 our	 civilization	 to	 new
heights	 of	 glory.	 Yes,	 he	 may	 have	 been	 a	 tyrant.	 He	 had	 destroyed	 the
democratic	 and	 egalitarian	 society	 of	 the	 Asuras	 and	 made	 it	 into	 a	 mean
fighting	machine.	Yes,	he	wallowed	in	luxury	and	did	whatever	he	pleased.	The
society	he	had	created	was	not	perfect.	The	majority	of	us	remained	poor.	Yet
we	knew	that	hard	work	and	luck	could	make	us	rich	and	powerful.	There	were
no	congenital,	privileged	castes	such	as	the	Brahmins	were	among	the	Devas.
Despite	 our	 crushing	 poverty	 and	 the	 seething	 anger	 we	 felt	 for	 the	 rich	 and
privileged,	we	enjoyed	one	luxury	compared	to	 our	counterparts	in	the	Deva
kingdoms	 –	 we	 were	 treated	 like	 human	 beings.	 Most	 of	 us	 were	 poor,	 but
there	was	a	silent	dignity	in	our	poverty.	But	as	I	leaned	over	my	fallen	King,	I
did	not	know	any	of	this.	It	was	later,	much	later	that	these	things	became	clear
to	me.	But	by	then	it	was	too	late.
The	 old	 King	 mumbled	 something	 but	 I	 could	 understand	 what	 he	 was
trying	 to	 say.	 I	 touched	 his	 forehead.	 It	 was	 burning	 hot.	 He	 had	 fever	 and
wheezed	 heavily.	 He	 was	 dying	 and	 it	 was	 unbearable	 to	 watch.	 He	 mumbled
something	 again.	 I	 could	 only	 make	 out	 that	 he	 wanted	 me	 to	 take	 him
somewhere.	 Poor	 man!	 I	 began	 to	 cry	 despite	 myself.	 I	 took	 his	 head	 in	 my
hands	 and	 hugged	 him	 close	 to	 my	 bosom.	 ‘I	 was	 hugging	a	real	 King.’	 The
exhilaration	 I	 felt	 then!	 In	 my	 excitement	 I	 told	 him	 I	 would	 seek	 revenge.	 “I
will	complete	you	work,	your	Highness.	Do	not	worry	and	go	in	peace.	I	will
do	it	for	our	race.”	I	could	not	believe	what	I	was	saying	to	the	dying	man.	“My
methods	may	be	different,	even	ignoble,	as	per	your	standards.”
Ravana	 wheezed	 heavily.	 I	 moved	 my	 mouth	 towards	 his	 half-eaten	 ear.
The	 stench	 of	 putrefying	 flesh	 made	 me	 gag,	 but	 I	 controlled	 myself	 and
whispered	in	his	ear,	“Once,	I	too	was	a	warrior,	but	I	have	grown	old.
Arms	frighten	me	now.	I	am	terrified	of	war.	I	cannot	beat	even	an	eightyear	 old.	 Nevertheless,	 my	 methods	 are	 deadly.	 I	 will	 have	 my	 revenge,	 for
you,	for	me	and	for	our	blighted	race.	Rama	will	not	go	free	for	what	he	has
done	to	you	and	our	race.	Believe	me	and	go	in	peace.”
As	I	said	this,	I	felt	a	purpose	had	come	to	my	life.	At	least	my	thoroughly
unremarkable	 life	 would	 be	 of	 some	 use.	 I	 kissed	 my	 King’s	 forehead	 and
gently	 laid	 his	 head	 on	 the	 wet	 earth.	 He	 wheezed	 again	 agonizingly.	 I	 stood
there	for	a	long	time,	watching	Ravana	die.	When	silver	streaks	appeared	in	the

eastern	sky	and	the	cawing	of	the	crows	heralded	a	new	dawn,	mighty	Ravana
laboriously	and	painfully	breathed	his	last.	I	waited	for	half	an	hour	more	and
then	 I	 knelt	 down	 and	 divested	 him	 of	 all	 the	 gold	 ornaments	 he	 wore.	 He
would	not	be	needing	them	wherever	he	had	gone	to.	It	was	a	good	haul	and	I
was	happy	to	have	stumbled	upon	my	King.
As	I	walked	back	towards	the	city,	the	enormity	and	stupidity	of	the	words
I	had	said	to	the	dying	man	hit	me.	‘I	was	not	bound	by	anything,	not	even	by
my	words	to	a	dead	man.’	By	the	time	I	reached	the	outer	edge	of	the	city,	I	had
convinced	myself	that	there	was	nothing	wrong	in	breaking	my	word	as	given
to	Ravana.	I	was	no	hero	to	take	on	a	revengeful	mission	against	Rama.	Soon	I
was	 caught	 by	 the	 Vanara	 soldiers	 and	 marched	 back	 to	 the	 city	 to	 watch	 the
victory	processions.	By	late	morning	I	had	practically	forgotten	about	revenge.
Many	people	had	been	hauled	forcefully	to	the	royal	street	and	made	to	sit
in	 the	 hot	 sun	 on	 either	 sides	 of	 the	 road.	 Vanara	 soldiers	 mercilessly	 beat
anyone	 who	 even	 dared	 to	 shift	 their	 position.	 The	 Asuras	 watched	 with
seething	 anger	 and	 a	 sense	 of	 helplessness,	 as	 their	 women	 were	 dragged
through	the	streets.	Fear	hung	like	a	nasty	mist	that	refused	to	clear	long	after
sunrise.	 Surprisingly,	 the	 day	 was	 clear	 and	 windy.	 Everything	 looked	 fresh
after	yesterday’s	torrential	rain.	The	trees	were	stunningly	green	and	the	sky	a
deep	 blue	 with	 soft,	 fluffy,	 cotton	 clouds	 floating	 about	 aimlessly.	 Small
puddles	 had	 formed	 here	 and	 there	 and	 frogs	 jumped	 in	 and	 out	 of	 them	 in
mirth.	The	whole	world	was	radiant.	In	less	than	a	day,	it	was	as	if	Ravana	and
his	fantastic	dreams	had	never	existed.	I	pushed	Ravana’s	ornaments	that	I	had
stolen	from	his	corpse	down	my	loincloth.	Stolen	was	not	the	word,	reclaimed
was	better,	for	whatever	Ravana	owned	had	been	taken	from	us	–	from	me	and
people	 like	 me,	 sitting	 here	 waiting	 for	 the	 next	 Ravana.	 The	 flag	 of	 Vishnu
flew	high	from	the	tower	of	the	palace.	We	waited	to	welcome	our	next	master,
Rama.	Lest	we	run	away	from	the	wonderful	blessings	that	was	being	promised
by	the	new	Lord,	we	were	held	forcibly	in	place	by	the	brutish	Vanaras.
By	afternoon,	men	had	started	to	faint	in	the	heat.	The	Vanaras,	used	to	the
fierce	but	dry	summer	heat	of	central	India,	were	sweating	profusely	from	the
milder	but	sultry	tropical	heat.	This	made	them	more	irritable	and	angry.	Even
the	slightest	movement	was	dealt	with	severe	beatings.	I	sat	next	to	a	teenager
who	stared	intently	at	the	Vanara	soldiers	a	few	feet	away.	I	could	smell	trouble
a	mile	away.	I	knew	what	was	going	through	the	mind	of	the	teenager.	I	had	to
get	away	from	this	place	as	fast	as	possible.	But	how	could	I	slip	away	without
attracting	 anyone’s	 attention.	 The	 teenager	 acted	 before	 I	 could	 formulate	 a

plan	 to	 escape.	 Leaping	 from	 his	 place,	 he	 rushed	 towards	 the	 unsuspecting
soldiers.	 Hearing	 the	 noise,	 they	 turned	 but	 caught	 the	 full	 force	 of	 the
teenager ’s	blows	in	their	faces.	They	staggered	and	fell.	The	teenager	grabbed
their	spears	and	thrust	them	repeatedly	into	their	bodies.	As	if	in	cue,	many	of
the	 young	 men	 attacked	 the	 Vanara	 soldiers.	 But	 the	 vast	 majority	 of	 men,
including	me,	watched	the	drama	without	any	reaction.	More	and	more	Vanara
soldiers	ran	from	the	fort	to	aid	their	comrades,	and	within	a	few	minutes,	they
had	managed	to	kill	the	young	rebels.
The	boy	who	started	this	farce	was	hacked	into	pieces,	his	limbs	thrown
into	the	crowd	in	all	directions.	His	arms	landed	near	me	and	I	kicked	the	dirty
thing	away	towards	my	terrified	neighbor,	who	promptly	gagged	and	vomited.
Some	 blood	 of	 the	 dead	 teenager	 had	 fallen	 on	 my	 face	 and	 shoulders	 and	 I
wiped	 it	 off	 with	 my	 palm	 and	 then	 wiped	 my	 hand	 on	 my	 dhothi.	 For	 their
slain	comrades,	the	Vanaras	exacted	a	terrible	revenge	by	randomly	choosing
some	 of	 our	 men	 and	 beheading	 them.	 It	 was	 pure	 terror	 in	 action	 and
succeeded	in	quenching	any	thoughts	of	heroism	in	the	heart	of	any	Asura	hero
wannabe.
By	 late	 afternoon,	 the	 Vanaras	 had	 got	 bored	 of	 their	 game	 and	 were
lazily	walking	around.	Some	Asuras	had	fainted	in	the	fierce	afternoon	sun	and
begged	for	water.	I	had	dozed	off	lazily	when	the	sudden	roll	of	Chendas	woke
me.	 At	 the	 far	 end,	 the	 fort	 gates	 opened	 and	 a	 procession	 entered	 the	 royal
highway.	The	entire	crowd	craned	to	see	what	was	happening.	The	procession
wound	its	way	slowly	through	the	waves	of	the	gasping	crowd.	I	could	only	see
that	they	had	raised	something	on	a	staff	and	it	was	bobbing	up	and	down	in	the
crowd.	An	agonized	wail	rose	from	the	fort	end	and	followed	the	procession.
As	the	procession	neared	me,	I	was	horrified	to	find	that	it	was	Ravana’s	head
that	was	bobbing	up	and	down	on	the	staff	carried	by	Angada.	The	once	stately
and	handsome	face	looked	grotesque	in	death,	with	its	eyes	missing,	part	of	its
cheeks	gnawed	away	by	rats	and	a	bloody	stub	of	a	nose,	half	eaten	by	jackals.
Behind	Angada,	Sugreeva,	the	cruel	and	drunken-looking	King	of	Kishkindha,
tottered	 by,	 barely	 able	 to	 carry	 his	 heavy	 club.	 Many	 ugly	 and	 hairy,	 noble
monkey-men,	walked	with	their	crude	clubs	and	heavy	staffs	behind	their	King.
Instead	of	the	deer	skin	clothing	they	were	used	to,	they	all	wore	the	fine	silk
clothes	 that	 had	 been	 looted	 from	 the	 palace,	 in	 an	 attempt	 to	 emulate	 Asura
noble	men.	They	looked	awkward	in	those	clothes	but	they	carried	huge,	stone
clubs	 and	 no	 man	 dared	 to	 laugh.	 Then	 followed	 the	 Asura	 men	 with	 their
Chendas	 and	 horns,	 trumpeting	 the	 victory	 of	 their	 new	 masters.	 They	 were

followed	 by	 Rama,	 his	 brother,	 and	 a	 triumphant-looking	 Sita,	 glowing	 with
happiness	beside	her	husband	in	Ravana’s	chariot.
Beside	 the	 royal	 chariot,	 on	 either	 side,	 ran	 Hanuman	 and	 Vibhishana,
doing	odd	errands	as	commanded	by	Lakshmana,	competing	with	each	other	in
pleasing	their	masters.	The	rivalry	between	these	two	servitors	of	Rama,	was
evident.	Rama	sat	with	Ravana’s	diamond	studded,	golden	crown	on	his	head.
He	wore	a	wooden	smile	and	raised	his	palms	slightly	as	if	he	showering	his
blessing	on	us.	I	noticed	that	he	placed	his	bow	and	quiver	of	arrows	between
him	and	his	wife.	I	also	noticed	that	he	deliberately	did	not	look	at	his	wife	and
consciously	avoided	even	an	accidental	touch	from	her.
It	 appeared	 strange	 then,	 but	 later,	 as	 I	 became	 initiated	 into	 the	 Deva
culture,	it	all	made	sense.	The	events	that	unfolded	that	evening	added	greatly
to	my	knowledge.	Behind	Rama’s	chariot	came	palanquins	carrying	the	woman
of	the	palace.	In	one	of	them,	sat	Mandodari,	her	face	partially	veiled	and	her
head	 tonsured.	 She	 was	 wearing	 a	 plain	 white	 sari.	 More	 than	 the	 head	 of
Ravana	 bobbing	 up	 and	 down	 on	 a	 staff,	 it	 was	 the	 sight	 of	 the	 Asura	 Queen
dressed	like	a	Deva	widow	that	shook	the	crowd.	She	sat	there	with	immense
dignity	 and	 self-control	 as	 wave	 upon	 waves	 of	 Asura	 men	 on	 either	 side
bowed	down	to	the	earth	and	wailed	at	her	plight.	Vanara	soldiers	kicked	and
screamed,	 trying	 to	 stop	 the	 Asuras	 from	 crying	 out	 in	 distress	 and	 prodded
them	 to	 shout	 ‘Sri	 Rama	 jaya’.	 Yet	 the	 Asuras	 refused	 to	 be	 deprived	 of	 this
small	 luxury	 to	 cry	 for	 their	 shattered	 dreams.	 Broken	 bones	 were	 nothing
compared	 to	 vanished	 dreams.	 I	 could	 not	 control	 my	 tears	 and	 joined	 my
neighbours	in	pounding	my	chest	and	wailing	out	loud.
The	frenzy	of	the	Chendas	and	horns	could	not	suppress	the	misery	of	the
Asuras’	cries.	It	was	the	cry	of	a	race	facing	the	deep	abyss	of	extinction.	It	was
the	 death	 cry	 of	 a	 culture.	 Many	 years	 ago,	 the	 Asuras	 had	 seen	 a	 shining
promise	 of	 renewal,	 but	 now	 it	 lay	 shattered.	 As	 the	 setting	 sun	 bloodied	 the
turbulent	 sea,	 we	 buried	 our	 dreams	 of	 a	 world	 without	 borders,	 a	 world	 of
equality.	For	 many	ages,	the	Asuras	of	India	held	up	 a	beacon	of	hope	to	the
world	 for	 a	 world	 without	 slavery	 and	 caste,	 where	 anyone	 with	 fire	 in	 his
heart	 and	 the	 ambition	 to	 dream,	 could	 carve	 his	 own	 destiny.	 That	 dream
collapsed	 thousands	 of	 years	 ago	 when	 our	 cities	 on	 the	 bank	 of	 Saraswathi
and	Indus	fell	to	the	barbarian	attacks	of	the	Devas.	Yet	it	found	utterance	again
in	its	heroes	like	Mahabali	and	Ravana.
And	that	hero	was	now	bobbing	up	and	down	on	the	tip	of	a	staff	held	by	a
beast.	The	procession	stopped	near	the	sea.	The	crowd	ran	to	the	beach	to	see

what	was	happening.	The	Asura	soldiers,	who	had	fought	a	few	hours	before
with	the	Vanaras,	now	joined	their	foes	to	control	the	crowd.	They	now	served
the	 new	 regime	 and	 wanted	 their	 salaries,	 their	 promotions,	 and	 perks,	 to
remain	protected.	They	were	public	servants,	ready	to	land	heavy	blows	on	the
public	 at	 short	 notice	 from	 their	 masters.	 Their	 lathis	 fell	 with	 sickening
whacks	 on	 the	 backs	 of	 the	 hapless	 common	 man.	 They	 formed	 a	 chain	 to
prevent	the	public	from	getting	too	near	the	leaders.	A	dais	had	been	raised	for
the	 great	 men	 to	 address	 us.	 We	 were	 all	 asked	 to	 sit	 down	 on	 the	 beach.	 We
were	 pushed	 down,	 pressed	 down	 and	 when	 required,	 beaten	 down	 to	 the
ground.	After	a	delay	when	the	sycophants	of	Rama,	then	the	sycophants	of	the
sycophants,	 ran	 around	 fetching	 this	 and	 that	 and	 grovelling	 before	 their
immediate	 bosses	 and	 barking	 at	 their	 subordinates,	 Rama	 climbed	 onto	 the
dais.	A	deep	frown	lined	his	brow.	But	the	smile	was	back	on	his	face	again	as
he	 waved.	 A	 few	 hands	 waved	 back	 and	 again	 the	 frown	 returned	 to	 his	 face.
The	 sycophants	 got	 their	 cue	 and	 runners	 were	 dispatched	 to	 various	 police
supervisors.	Soon	we	were	all	waving	to	Rama	and	cheering	his	every	word,
though	we	did	not	understand	a	word,	as	he	was	speaking	in	Sanskrit.	After	a
while,	 Vibhishana	 stood	 up	 and	 whispered	 something	 to	 Rama.	 Then	 he
translated	 Rama’s	 speech,	 sentence	 by	 sentence	 Obviously	 we	 had	 not	 been
clapping	at	the	right	places	in	Rama’s	speech.
Rama	started	from	the	beginning	and	said	that	all	of	us	should	be	happy
as	we	had	freed	us	from	the	tyranny	of	Ravana,	an	evil	demon.	It	was	his	belief
that	good	always	triumphed	over	evil.	It	was	logical	and	we	clapped	for	these
great	 words.	 Then	 Rama	 announced	 that	 we	 would	 be	 ruled	 as	 per	 Deva
dharma	 henceforth.	 There	 would	 not	 be	 any	 councils,	 or	 even	 village	 level
panchayats.	The	King	would	be	supreme	and	he	would	rule	as	per	the	advice	of
the	 Brahmins.	 Though	 many	 in	 the	 crowd	 did	 not	 understand	 the	 full
implications	of	this,	there	was	an	uneasy	silence	from	the	crowd	until	we	were
all	prodded	to	cheer.	Rama	stated	that	all	subjects	would	be	divided	into	four
castes	and	a	profession	would	be	allocated	to	each	of	them.	The	Brahmins,	who
had	come	from	the	face	of	the	God,	would	be	the	supreme	caste.	They	would
dispense	 knowledge,	 act	 as	 representatives	 of	 God	 on	 earth,	 and	 it	 was
imperative	 that	 everyone	 listen	 and	 obey	 them.	 The	 Kshatriyas,	 who	 had	 the
great	fortune	of	coming	from	the	limbs	of	God,	would	rule	over	society	as	per
the	advice	of	the	Brahmins.
The	 Vaishyas,	 the	 merchants	 who	 had	 come	 from	 the	 thighs	 of	 God,
would	be	given	permission	to	run	business	and	trade	and	would	be	under	the

other	two	castes.	The	artisans,	small	land	owners,	the	ordinary	soldiers,	all	the
Shudras,	who	had	unfortunately	come	from	the	foot	of	God,	would	serve	the
other	 three	 castes.	 It	 was	 so	 confusing,	 but	 we	 all	 clapped.	 I	 wondered	 what
would	 happen	 to	 the	 unskilled	 or	 semi-skilled	 peasants,	 the	 blackest	 of	 black
people,	 who	 eked	 out	 a	 living	 doing	 odd	 jobs	 like	 me	 –	 cleaning	 the	 streets,
washing	clothes,	being	porters.	I	was	curious	to	know	which	bodily	part	of	the
Deva	 God	 people	 like	 me	 had	 come	 from.	 I	 soon	 got	 the	 answer.	 Rama
announced	 that	 all	 others,	 who	 did	 not	 fall	 into	 the	 mentioned	 categories,
would	be	considered	pariahs	or	untouchables.	He	felt	sorry	for	our	plights	but
asked	us	to	take	it	as	a	blessing	from	God.
The	speech	went	on	and	on,	boring	us	with	details	about	Deva	glories	and
their	 way	 of	 life.	 Finally,	 he	 announced	 that	 he	 did	 not	 wish	 to	 be	 King	 of
Lanka	 or	 the	 Asuras.	 He	 raised	 the	 hand	 of	 Vibhishana	 and	 proclaimed,
“Behold!	 The	 King	 of	 Asuras”.	 A	 few	 more	 blows	 by	 policemen	 ensured	 a
smattering	 of	 applause.	 Vibhishana	 fell	 at	 Rama’s	 feet.	 We	 watched	 what	 our
King	 did	 with	 revulsion.	 This	 was	 a	 convenient	 arrangement	 for	 Rama.	 He
could	enjoy	power	without	the	responsibility.	This	was	our	fate,	to	be	ruled	by
a	spineless	ruler	under	the	advice	of	a	foreigner.	Vibhishana	began	his	speech.
He	 apologised	 to	 the	 Devas	 and	 ended	 with	 the	 lament	 that	 his	 wayward
brothers,	 Ravana	 and	 Kumbakarna,	 had	 not	 recognized	 the	 divinity	 of	 Rama.
As	the	sun	set	and	darkness	and	gloom	spread	over	Lanka,	Vibhishana	said	that
he	would	perform	the	last	rites	of	his	slain	brother	as	per	the	Vedic	tradition	of
the	Devas.	A	wave	of	protest	rose	from	the	crowd	and	died	at	the	sight	of	more
policemen	surrounding	them	with	raised	swords.	A	 few	Brahmins	arrived	on
stage	and	Rama,	Vibhishana,	Lakshmana,	and	Sita,	all	scrambled	up	in	respect.
Rama,	Lakshmana	and	Vibhishana,	fell	at	the	Brahmins’	feet	and	received	their
blessings.
But	when	Sita	tried	to	touch	their	feet,	they	jumped	back	in	revulsion.	A
hush	descended	on	the	crowd.	We	sensed	something	dramatic	and	sensational
was	 happening.	 One	 of	 the	 Brahmins	 whispered	 something	 to	 Rama	 and	 we
saw	 his	 face	 grow	 darker.	 Rama	 spoke	 to	 Lakshmana	 and	 the	 colour	 drained
from	his	face.	For	an	awkward	moment,	no	one	did	anything.	Then	Lakshmana
grabbed	Sita’s	hands	and	pulled	her	down	from	the	dais.	She	tried	to	wriggle
away,	 but	 her	 brother-in-law	 gripped	 her	 hard.	 She	 was	 pushed	 into	 a	 corner
just	 below	 the	 dais,	 where	 she	 stood	 burning	 with	 shame,	 indignation	 and
embarrassment.	One	of	the	Brahmins	came	forward	and	spoke	in	Sanskrit.
Then	Vibhishana	stepped	forward	and	translated	the	Brahmin’s	words.	He

sounded	 ecstatic	 when	 he	 said,	 “See,	 my	 countrymen,	 how	 fair	 the	 Brahmins
are.	Rama,	my	Lord,	is	King	of	the	world,	but	even	he	is	not	above	the	law.	His
wife,	 Sita,	 as	 we	 all	 know,	 was	 held	 captive	 by	 that	 demon	 Ravana.	 It	 is	 our
sorrow,	that	because	of	him	who	I	once	called	brother,	a	virtuous	lady	like	my
beloved	Lord’s	wife,	has	been	polluted.	Please	have	no	doubts,	Sita	Devi	is	like
a	mother	to	me.	But,	we	should	be	proud	of	the	way	the	learned	pundits	have
applied	their	laws	to	all	equally.	In	their	wisdom	they	have	ruled	that	Sita	Devi
will	 have	 to	 prove	 her	 purity	 and	 chastity	 in	 the	 time-honoured	 way	 of	 the
Devas.”	Vibhishana	paused	to	gulp	some	water.	It	was	evident	that	he	relished
this	opportunity	to	demonstrate	a	new	order.
Sita	had	stopped	weeping	and	stood	defiant.	The	veil	fell	from	her	face	as
she	stared	at	her	husband.	The	resemblance	was	unmistakable.	She	might	have
looked	like	her	mother,	but	in	her	posture	and	the	fire	in	her	eyes,	she	looked
every	inch	the	daughter	of	Ravana.	She	glared	at	the	husband	for	whom	she	had
waited	so	patiently.	Rama	looked	away,	unable	to	face	her.	His	hands	trembled
yet	 that	 wooden	 smile	 never	 left	 his	 lips.	 He	 was	 trying	 hard	 to	 contain	 his
emotions.	 He	 sat	 there	 not	 like	 a	 warrior	 who	 had	 vanquished	 the	 most
powerful	king	in	the	world,	but	like	a	man	stricken	by	fate.	Mandodari,	seated	a
few	yards	away,	looked	 shocked	at	this	new	development.	She	tried	to	get	up
but	was	pushed	back	on	the	orders	of	the	Brahmins.	They	barked	that	widows
were	 not	 allowed	 to	 be	 seen	 in	 the	 sunlight.	 They	 had	 already	 sinned	 by
allowing	her	to	witness	her	husband’s	last	journey.	This	would	be	Mandodari’s
last	day	in	the	sun.	A	funeral	pyre	was	set	up	and	the	head	of	Ravana	was	taken
down	from	the	staff.	A	body	which	was	supposedly	Ravana’s,	was	carried	in	by
four	dark	men,	my	fellow	untouchables.
The	sun	had	set	and	dark	clouds	loomed	large	in	the	western	skies.	It	was
the	 season	 of	 evening	 showers	 and	 the	 earth	 got	 ready	 for	 her	 ritual	 bath.
Vibhishana	walked	towards	his	brother ’s	funeral	pyre	holding	a	flaming	torch.
Vibhishana	 ordered	 for	 another	 pyre	 to	 be	 set	 up	 near	 Ravana’s.	 He	 ordered
that	finest	of	Sandal	woods	to	be	brought	for	this	pyre	was	meant	for	a	divine
purpose.	 We	 waited	 with	 baited	 breath.	 Soon	 another	 pyre	 was	 lit.	 Specially
selected	Asura	ladies	dragged	Sita	towards	this	special	pyre	that	would	tell	the
world	 whether	 she	 was	 pure	 or	 not..	 We	 did	 not	 understand	 what	 was
happening.	What	was	this	time-honored	method	of	the	Devas	to	test	a	woman’s
chastity?	As	the	Brahmins	croaked	their	mantras	and	sprinkled	water	on	all	and
sundry,	 Vibhishana	 walked	 three	 times	 around	 the	 pyre	 of	 his	 slain	 brother.
Some	of	the	drops	of	water	fell	onto	my	skin	and	by	impulse	was	to	smell	the

water.	It	stank.
My	neighbour	whispered	in	my	ear,	“It’s	cow’s	urine	and	gobar.	They	use
it	 for	 purification.”	 We,	 the	 untouchables,	 were	 purified	 with	 bullshit.	 Small
drops	of	rain	fell.	Soon	the	skies	would	open.	Lightning	crackled,	tearing	the
dark	skies	into	pieces.
Just	 before	 Vibhishana	 lit	 the	 funeral	 pyre,	 he	 dramatically	 raised	 the
torchand	proclaimed,	“This	is	the	end	of	a	tyrant,	a	demon,	a	Rakshasa.	Let	his
life	 be	 a	 lesson	 to	 all	 those	 who	 defy	 the	 supreme	 power	 of	 dharma,	 whose
earthly	 manifestation	 is	 our	 master,	 Lord	 Sri	 Ramachandra	 of	 the	 heavenly
kingdom	of	Ayodhya.	Let	today	be	the	end	of	the	evil	and	decadent	ways	of	the
Asuras.	 Let	 today	 be	 the	 holiest	 of	 all	 days,	 when	 Lord	 Rama,	 the	 avatar	 of
Vishnu,	 showers	 his	 immense	 mercy	 upon	 us.	 He	 shall,	 in	 his	 infinite
compassion,	lead	us	to	an	exalted	way	of	life.	By	the	time	Ravana’s	sinful	body
has	crumbled	into	ashes,	a	new	dawn	of	Deva	dharma	will	rise	over	our	dark
horizon.	A	dharma	in	which	every	man	will	know	his	place;	and	learning	will
be	 valued;	 the	 prowess	 of	 the	 warriors	 will	 be	 respected;	 and	 the	 skills	 in
business	 appreciated.	 No	 longer	 will	 we	 be	 burdened	 by	 hard	 struggles	 to
succeed	 in	 life,	 nor	 will	 we	 indulge	 in	 mad	 competition	 to	 get	 further	 ahead
than	 our	 neighbours.	 We	 will	 cast	 away	 the	 evil	 society	 of	 the	 Asuras	 under
Ravana,	 when	 men	 thought	 that	 merit	 and	 hard	 work	 alone	 could	 assure	 him
happiness.
We	will	not,	from	now	on,	forget	that	we	are	but	puny	little	beings,	and
that	our	actions	and	merit	is	nothing	compared	to	the	supreme	power	of	God.
Our	material	or	spiritual	success	flows	from	his	compassion	and	love.	If	you
have	had	the	misfortune	to	be	born	a	pariah,	do	not	grieve.	In	this	life	you	will
face	 difficulties	 because	 in	 a	 previous	 life	 you	 have	 done	 wrong.	 For	 your
karma	 you	 have	 been	 born	 a	 Shudra	 or	 pariah.	 Do	 your	 duty	 and	 serve	 your
masters	 faithfully;	 do	 not	 become	 overly	 ambitious	 or	 jealous	 of	 the	 respect
and	riches	your	superiors	enjoy.	Only	with	humility	can	you	ensure	that	God,
in	his	infinite	compassion	and	wisdom,	will	show	mercy	and	ensure	that	your
birth	in	the	next	level	of	varna	hierarchy	in	your	next	life.
Vishnu,	 is	 the	 preserver	 of	 the	 social	 order.	 The	 Lord	 promised	 that
whenever	there	was	a	threat	to	this	order,	he	would	take	birth	among	us	mere
human	 beings	 and	 restore	 dharma.	 Ravana	 and	 the	 ideology	 he	 perpetuated,
was	 dangerous	 and	 disrupted	 that	 order.	 He	 would	 say	 that	 being	 a	 mere
peasant	 boy	 of	 half-caste	 origin,	 he	 had	 created	 the	 mightiest	 empire	 in	 the
world,	with	only	his	own	bravery,	hard	work,	ingenuity,	and	a	few	men	to	aid

him.	 His	 temporary	 victory	 might	 have	 dazzled	 many.	 But	 I	 put	 my	 faith	 in
God.	 Now,	 everything	 Ravana	 achieved	 is	 mine.	 Did	 I	 work	 for	 it?	 Did	 I	 use
great	wit?	Did	I	form	an	evil	company	of	men	like	Prahastha,	Kumbakarna	and
Rudraka?	 The	 only	 thing	 I	 did	 was	 to	 put	 my	 complete	 faith	 in	 God.	 Ravana
was	killed	and	the	kingdom	and	the	richness	he	created	is	mine	now.
Earlier,	another	usurper	of	this	social	order,	who	foolishly	believed	that
all	human	beings	were	equal,	ruled	the	western	coast	of	India.	You	might	know
Mahabali,	 who	 ruled	 from	 Muzuris	 and	 challenged	 Vishnu’s	 social	 order.	 At
that	time	the	mighty	Emperor	was	defeated	by	a	small	Brahmin	boy,	Vamana,
who	 was	 none	 other	 than	 another	 avatar	 of	 Vishnu.	 That	 should	 have	 been	 a
lesson	to	Ravana.	I	tried	to	warn	him,	for	I	loved	him	once	as	my	brother.	But
he	was	too	arrogant	and	proud	to	listen	to	good	advice;	too	engrossed	in	life	to
worry	about	death.	He	thought	his	armies	would	save	him.	He	thought	he	had
given	a	good	life	to	his	subjects,	so	they	would	save	him.	He	thought	he	had
created	 architectural	 marvels	 in	 the	 great	 Shiva	 temples	 he	 had	 built	 and	 so
Shiva	would	save	him.	But	when	the	time,	Ravana	had	no	answer.	There	were
no	 one	 to	 save	 him,	 except	 for	 the	 destitute	 and	 the	 poor,	 who	 did	 not
understand	what	was	right	and	wrong.
When	Rama	came,	I	fell	at	his	feet,	for	I	recognized	God.	So	did	all	the
noble	 men	 of	 intellect	 and	 wisdom,	 whether	 it	 was	 Varuna,	 or	 Lankini,	 or
Jambumali.	 And	 see	 how	 we	 have	 been	 rewarded.	 Government	 servants,
merchants,	 the	 police,	 and	 the	 army	 of	 Ravana,	 most	 have	 now	 recognized
their	folly	and	pledged	support	to	my	reign	in	Rama’s	name.	I	am	sure	all	of
you,	who	had	foolishly	believed	in	Ravana	or	Mahabali’s	utopian	dreams,	will
now	 start	 leading	 your	 life	 as	 prescribed	 by	 our	 smrithis.	 Only	 by	 complete
submission	 to	 his	 supreme	 will	 can	 one	 achieve	 moksha.	 The	 laws	 of	 our
dharma,	as	defined	by	the	great	sage	Manu,	are	eternal	and	divine.	These	laws
cover	every	aspect	of	life.	From	birth	to	death,	these	dharmic	laws	will	show
you	the	path.
Knowledge	is	a	dangerous	thing	in	the	hands	of	people	who	do	not	know
how	to	use	it.	The	Asuras	had	so	far	made	the	mistake	of	educating	everyone
without	 thinking	 of	 the	 consequences	 of	 equipping	 evil	 and	 ignorant	 people
with	knowledge.	We	made	the	mistake	of	seeing	every	human	being	as	equal.
But	things	will	be	different	now.	We	will	not	continue	with	this	folly.	Only	the
first	 three	 castes	 will	 have	 the	 right	 to	 education	 and	 that	 too,	 it	 will	 be
restricted	 to	 what	 is	 strictly	 required	 for	 their	 profession.	 The	 salvation	 of
others	 lies	 in	 serving	 their	 masters	 with	 dedication	 and	 sincerity,	 without

worrying	 about	 the	 results	 of	 their	 karma.	 This	 is	 the	 law	 ordained	 by	 Lord
Vishnu	himself.	Let	any	man	who	thinks	he	can	change	or	challenge	this	law,
do	so	at	his	own	peril.”
Vibhishana	 paused	 and	 frowned	 at	 the	 crowd.	 We	 sat	 stone-faced.	 Then,
licking	his	lips,	he	continued,	“This	soil	is	blessed,	for	the	great	God	Vishnu
himself	took	avatar	here.	Men	were	defying	fate,	men	were	defying	the	Gods.
Ravana	tried	to	teach	the	world	that	mere	human	effort	and	will	power	could
lead	to	success.	He	was	worse	than	Mahabali,	for	Mahabali	wisely	surrendered
his	kingdom	when	Vishnu	came	as	Vamana.	But	my	brother,	I	am	ashamed	to
say	 so,	 chose	 to	 fight	 God	 himself.	 Ravana	 was	 a	 brave	 man,	 but	 he	 was
conceited	and	vain,	and	thought	that	he	could	be	a	match	for	Vishnu.	He	taught
you	wrong	by	teaching	you	to	defy	fate	and	encouraging	you	to	think	that	you
were	in	control	of	your	own	destiny.
God	has	put	an	end	to	the	chaos	unleashed	by	the	evil	genius	of	Ravana.
The	peaceful	order	of	varnashrama	dharma	has	been	restored.	No	longer	shall
the	 men	 who	 clean	 drains	 and	 toilets	 think	 that	 they	 are	 equal	 to	 those	 who
learn	Sanskrit	and	chant	the	Vedas.	No	longer	shall	the	toddy	maker	 consider
himself	equal	to	the	merchant	selling	silk.	No	longer	shall	the	tiller	of	the	soil
think	 he	 is	 equal	 to	 an	 accountant.	 Everyone	 has	 their	 place	 and	 knows	 his
place.
Mandodari,	 has	 taken	 the	 lead	 in	 setting	 an	 example	 of	 what	 a	 virtuous
widow’s	conduct	should	be.	We	all	know	the	shame	that	befell	her	in	the	heat	of
war.	 Great	 crimes	 were	 committed	 by	 both	 sides	 and	 she	 was	 an	 unfortunate
victim,”	Vibhishana	paused	and	suppressing	a	smile	as	he	looked	at	Mandodari.
There	 were	 a	 few	 snide	 remarks	 and	 cat	 calls	 among	 the	 soldiers,	 but	 I
could	feel	the	impotent	rage	and	hatred	that	burned	in	all	our	hearts.	Bastard!
He	had	no	intention	of	stopping.	The	air	was	thick	with	impending	rain	and	the
light	played	hide	and	seek	among	the	coconut	palms.	If	I	could	somehow	shut
up	the	man	who	dared	to	call	himself	the	leader	of	the	Asuras.	.	.
“What	 happened	 to	 the	 Queen	 was	 unfortunate,	 and	 Lord	 Rama	 has
punished	the	men	responsible	for	it.	But	to	our	shame,	my	brother	accepted	the
Queen	 after	 what	 had	 happened.	 He,	 like	 any	 other	 Asura,	 did	 not	 guard	 the
notions	of	chastity	and	purity	 of	 woman.	How	could	he	accept	her	after	what
had	happened?	But,	he	did	not	know	what	was	good	and	what	was	evil.	Why	did
this	 war	 start?	 Was	 there	 any	 reason	 for	 the	 devastation?	 He	 could	 have
remained	King,	as	a	vassal	of	the	great	God	Rama.
I	 am	 ashamed	 to	 say,	 Soorpanakha,	 my	 own	 sister,	 started	 this	 war.	 She

cannot	 be	 blamed	 completely.	 She	 was	 a	 product	 of	 our	 culture	 that	 allowed
women	 the	 freedom	 to	 lead	 a	 loose	 life.	 She	 tried	 to	 seduce	 the	 handsome
Lakshmana.	This	impudence	of	a	widow	to	fall	in	love	cannot	be	tolerated	by
any	man.	He	punished	Soorpanakha	by	mutilating	her	nose	and	ears.
Ravana,	 instead	 of	 accepting	 what	 God	 had	 ordained	 for	 our	 immoral
sister,	 decided	 to	 wage	 war	 against	 Lord	 Rama.	 Such	 arrogance,	 such	 false
pride.	 See	 what	 happened	 to	 him.	 I	 have	 banished	 Soorpanakha	 out	 of	 the
country.	She	is	my	sister	but	I	wanted	to	set	an	example	and	prove	my	master
that	the	Asuras	have	decided	to	shed	their	old	ways.	My	friend	Varuna	ensured
that	 she	 was	 banished	 to	 land	 of	 barbarians	 across	 the	 seas.	 She	 is	 now	 a
beggar	and	a	destitute,	eking	out	a	living	with	her	begging	bowl.	I	am	sad	at	the
fate	of	my	sister,	but	she	deserved	nothing	less.
Then	my	brother	kidnapped	Lord	Rama’s	wife.	I	have	heard	rumours	that
Sita	 is	 the	 daughter	 of	 Ravana	 and	 by	 kidnapping	 her,	 Ravana	 was	 trying	 to
save	his	own	daughter.	There	cannot	be	anything	more	deplorable.	How	could
a	 low-born	 Asura	 have	 fathered	 a	 Deva	 princess?	 Rama	 is	 not	 like	 Ravana.
Sita,	his	beloved	wife,	for	whose	sake	he	waged	a	bloody	war	and	staked	his
own	and	his	men’s	lives,	has	also	sinned.	I	am	sure,	Sita,	by	virtue	of	being	a
Deva	princess	and	wife	of	Lord	Rama,	has	remained	pure.	Ravana	did	not	dare
to	violate	her.	But,	Lord	Rama	knows	that	the	lustful	eyes	of	Ravana	and	other
Asuras	have	wandered	over	the	pure	body	of	his	wife.	Which	husband	would
tolerate	 that?	 Lord	 Rama	 is	 a	 man,	 unlike	 my	 dead	 brother	 who	 accepted	 a
violated	wife,	who	wishes	to	set	an	example	and	prove	to	the	whole	world	the
chastity	and	purity	of	his	wife.	He	wishes	to	burn	the	lustful	thoughts	of	Ravana
and	other	men	from	the	body	and	soul	of	his	wife	forever.
This	is	a	deeply	moving	personal	affair,	but	it	is	also	a	public	gesture	by
the	 Deva	 king	 for	 the	 whole	 world	 to	 emulate.	 Unlike	 the	 Asuras,	 the	 Devas
believe	in	the	purity	of	fire	and	life.	Fire	is	the	Supreme	God,	the	giver	of	life
and	energy.	Fire	cleanses	everything.	The	impurity	of	Sita	in	having	lived	with
the	Asuras	and	bearing	the	lustful	eyes	of	the	Asuras	on	her;	and	in	living	away
from	her	husband	for	such	a	long	period;	for	the	baseless	rumours	suggesting
that	she	is	the	daughter	of	Ravana;	all	these	will	be	cleansed	by	fire.	In	front	of
all	of	you,	in	front	of	the	Asuras	and	the	Vanaras,	in	front	of	the	whole	world,
Sita	will	undergo	the	supreme	test	the	Devas	have	to	test	a	woman’s	purity	–	the
Agni	 Pariksha.	 The	 divine	 fire	 that	 is	 burning	 near	 the	 funeral	 pyre	 of	 my
brother	will	determine	how	pure	Sita	mata	is.	If	she	is	chaste	and	pure,	she	will
remain	unscathed.	If	she	is	impure,	the	divine	fire	will	devour	her.

A	terrified	hush	fell	over	the	crowd.	Heads	turned	to	look	at	Rama,	who
sat	 in	 his	 high-backed	 chair.	 He	 was	 looking	 down	 and	 I	 could	 see	 he	 was
visibly	shaken	and	distressed.	Yet	he	did	not	stand	up	and	say,	‘Enough!	I	trust
my	wife’.	Hanuman	appeared	tense	and	nervous,	whereas	Vibhishana	gleefully
enjoyed	 his	 duties.	 Lakshmana	 appeared	 pale	 and	 anxious,	 but	 tried	 to	 hide	 it
with	his	trademark	scowl.	Mandodari,	who	was	sitting	in	one	corner	with	her
tonsured	head	covered	with	a	white	veil,	sobbed	uncontrollably.
There	was	tension	in	the	air	and	as	if	to	match	it,	the	first	clap	of	thunder
broke	 in	 the	 skies.	 I	 could	 see	 the	 black	 clouds	 of	 a	 thunder	 storm	 fast
approaching	the	island.	The	sun	was	nothing	but	the	silver	edge	of	the	looming
dark	 clouds.	 A	 powerful	 wind	 swayed	 the	 coconut	 palms	 and	 huge	 waves
crashed	 against	 the	 rocky	 boulders	 of	 the	 beach.	 People	 stood	 up	 as	 they
dragged	Sita	towards	the	divine	fire.	Initially	she	resisted	and	cried	out	to	her
husband	to	save	here.	But	when	she	comprehended	the	monstrosity	of	what	her
husband	wanted	her	to	do	in	order	to	prove	her	purity,	she	sagged	and	looked
piteously	 at	 her	 him.	 He	 averted	 his	 eyes	 and	 looked	 straight	 ahead,	 beyond
her,	beyond	his	soldiers,	beyond	us,	to	some	distant	point	on	the	horizon.	Tears
welled	 in	 his	 eyes.	 Beside	 him	 and	 his	 scowling	 brother,	 fat	 Brahmin	 priests
chanted	in	Sanskrit,	drowning	the	excited	voices	of	the	crowd	and	the	sobs	of
Mandodari	and	the	other	women.
On	 the	 beach,	 Vibhishana,	 the	 newly	 crowned	 King	 of	 the	 Asuras	 and
vassal	of	Rama,	stood	with	a	flaming	torch	in	his	hand	and	a	satisfied	smile	on
his	 face.	 In	 front	 of	 him	 lay	 the	 erstwhile	 King	 of	 the	 Asuras,	 dead,	 his	 face
half-eaten	by	beasts,	his	head	severed	from	his	rotting	body,	on	a	funeral	pyre.
Near	him,	the	fire	that	knew	what	chastity	is,	raged	with	its	hundred	arms.
The	 Asura	 soldiers	 left	 Sita	 near	 Vibhishana	 and	 marched	 back.	 The
excitement	in	the	crowd	rose	to	dizzying	heights.	Never	before	had	they	seen
anything	like	this.	The	sun	set	into	the	red	sea	that	rose	and	fell.	Silver-edged,
dark	 clouds	 loomed	 in	 the	 sky,	 creating	 a	 dark	 and	 evil	 world	 of	 sinisterlooking	 reptiles	 that	 twisted,	 turned	 and	 reflected	 a	 myriad	 colours	 from	 the
dying	sun.
“With	this	I	end	the	evil	reign	of	Ravana.	With	this	I	end	the	audacity	of	a
man	who	dared	to	challenge	the	Gods.	With	this,	I	end	the	debauched	life	of	a
demon	 who	 nearly	 destroyed	 the	 world.	 Victory	 to	 Sri	 Rama.	 .	 .”	 Vibhishana
thundered	 over	 the	 crowd	 and	 lit	 the	 funeral	 pyre	 of	 his	 brother	 as	 the	 rain
began	to	fall.
A	deep	and	inexplicable	grief	gripped	me	as	I	watched	Ravana	turn	into

ashes.	An	era	had	ended.	A	huge	cheer	rose	from	the	Vanaras	while	the	Asuras
hung	 their	 heads	 in	 shame.	 Sita	 stood	 near	 the	 burning	 body	 of	 her	 father
without	any	emotion,	lost	in	her	own	world	of	grief	and	betrayal.
“As	King	of	the	Asuras,	I	proclaim	that	this	day	shall	be	celebrated	every
year,	in	every	village	of	India,	as	the	day	of	Victory.	On	this	day,	every	man,
woman	 and	 child	 shall	 be	 reminded	 of	 the	 victory	 of	 our	 Lord,	 avatar	 of
Vishnu,	Sri	Ramachandra	of	Ayodhya,	over	the	evil	called	Ravana.	Let	Ravana
die	a	million	deaths	every	year	on	this	day,	in	every	village,	street,	and	home
of	 India.	 .	 .”	 Vibhishana	 raised	 the	 flaming	 torch	 towards	 the	 sky	 and	 the
Vanaras	 and	 a	 few	 Asuras	 cheered	 with	 enthusiasm.	 The	 sky	 responded	 with
angry	 thunder	 and	 it	 began	 to	 drizzle.	 The	 pyre	 burned	 hesitantly	 as	 thick,
black	 smoke	 coiled	 upwards,	 flickering,	 shattering,	 and	 re-forming	 in	 the
wind.
“Now	 comes	 the	 test	 of	 purity,	 the	 Agni	Pariksha	 for	 the	 respected	 and
beloved	 wife	 of	 our	 Lord.”	 Vibhishana	 announced.	 An	 Asura	 servant	 poured
more	 ghee	 into	 the	 burning	 pyre.	 The	 flames	 rose	 high	 and	 crackled	 in	 the
wind.	We	all	watched	in	horror	and	excitement,	as	Sita	hesitated,	looking	at	the
raging	 fire	 into	 which	 she	 was	 supposed	 to	 step	 to	 prove	 her	 chastity	 to	 her
husband.	She	looked	at	Rama,	trying	to	catch	his	eye,	but	the	God,	like	other
Gods,	 looked	 away	 when	 he	 was	 most	 needed.	 Vibhishana	 became	 impatient
and	ordered	more	ghee	 to	 be	 poured	 into	 the	 fire.	 Sita	 stood	 there	 for	 a	 few
moments	 longer.	 Then	 she	 slowly	 collapsed	 onto	 the	 floor.	 There	 was	 an
awkward	silence	among	the	crowd.	Had	she	backed	out?
Someone	near	me	whispered,	“She	might	not	be	as	pure	as	she	looks,	that
is	why	she	is	not	ready	to	face	the	fire.”
His	 neighbours	 snickered,	 each	 colouring	 their	 own	 imagination	 with
lewd	thoughts.
I	 angrily	 turned	 and	 said,	 “Such	 nonsense!	 Even	 if	 she	 is	 not	 virtuous,
how	 can	 it	 be	 proved	 by	 entering	 a	 raging	 fire?	 A	 fire	 cannot	 discriminate
between	a	virtuous	and	non-virtuous.”
The	man	who	had	made	comments	about	Sita	clearly	did	not	like	what	I
said.	 “So	 you,	 an	 ignorant	 peasant,	 knows	 all	 about	 fire.	 This	 is	 what	 the
learned	 Brahmins	 have	 said.	 Who	 are	 we	 to	 question	 them?”	 Though	 a	 few
appeared	sceptical,	most	nodded	their	heads	in	agreement.	I	had	missed	a	little
of	what	was	happening	in	talking	to	these	idiots.

Sita	 had	 stood	 up.	 Again	 the	 crowd	 sensed	 that	 something	 was	 going	 to
happen.	 Then	 with	 sudden	 strength,	 she	 ran	 towards	 the	 raging	 fire.	 Did	 we
hear	 correctly	 or	 was	 it	 my	 imagination?	 I’m	 still	 not	 sure.	 Did	 she	 cry	 out,
“Father.	.	.”	before	she	jumped	into	the	fire?	A	gasp	went	up	from	the	crowd
and	 at	 that	 moment	 the	 skies	 opened	 up	 and	 tons	 of	 water	 poured	 down.	 The
wind	 had	 turned	 into	 a	 full-fledged	 storm	 and	 the	 coconut	 palms	 swayed	 and
coiled,	the	fronds	whirling	in	a	frenzy	like	the	arms	of	a	drowning	man.	It	had
grown	unnaturally	dark	and	the	lightning	that	blazed	gave	everyone	a	ghostly
appearance.	The	crowd	pushed	towards	the	funeral	pyre	of	their	slain	King	and
soon	became	uncontrollable.	Policemen	pushed	and	shoved	back	the	crowd	and
there	 was	 total	 chaos.	 The	 pyre	 had	 gone	 out	 and	 we	 saw	 Hanuman	 carrying
Sita	to	Rama.	She	appeared	limp,	but	to	my	experienced	eyes	she	seemed	to	be
alive.	So,	she	was	pure	after	all.	I	remembered	when	I	had	held	her	in	my	hands
in	the	Vindhya	forests,	a	small	bundle	of	life	given	to	me	by	the	Asura	nobles
to	bury.
The	 crowd	 disappeared	 after	 the	 mela	 as	 the	 main	 actors	 disappreared
into	 the	 fort	 for	 another	 night	 of	 celebration.	 I	 stood	 there	 drenched	 in	 the
raging	 tropical	 storm	 till	 the	 crowd	 thinned	 and	 then	 slowly	 walked	 towards
Ravana’s	funeral	pyre.	It	was	still	raining	but	not	as	heavily	as	before.	The	pyre
was	 a	 mess.	 It	 was	 a	 mush	 of	 ash	 and	 mud,	 with	 bits	 of	 bone	 and	 half-burnt
skull	 protruding	 haphazardly.	 I	 stood	 there	 not	 knowing	 what	 to	 do.	 Then	 I
kicked	 the	 bones	 and	 other	 remnants	 of	 the	 great	 Asura	 Emperor	 into	 the
raging	waters	of	the	sea.	After	some	time,	I	walked	back	home	to	sleep.

62	Life	sprouts	again
Bhadra
The	months	after	the	death	of	Ravana,	were	a	horrible	period	in	the	life	of
the	Asuras.	There	was	confusion	regarding	the	new	caste	hierarchy	and	plenty
of	caste	conflicts.	Each	family	got	itself	aligned	to	whichever	caste	which	they
thought	would	emerge	on	top.	If	it	had	been	only	a	clear	division	on	the	basis
of	 four	 varnas,	 it	 would	 not	 have	 been	 so	 difficult	 to	 find	 one’s	 caste.	 The
hierarchy	would	have	been	well	defined	and	everyone	would	have	just	obeyed
or	 fought	 against	 it.	 I	 do	 not	 know	 whether	 it	 was	 an	 act	 of	 genius	 or	 a
reflection	 of	 muddled	 thinking,	 that	 devised	 the	 bewildering	 system	 of	 castes
and	 sub-castes.	 It	 divided	 our	 society	 into	 a	 million	 parts,	 with	 the	 Brahmins
clearly	at	the	top.
It	took	me	almost	three	months	to	understand	that	I	belonged	to	the	caste
of	washermen,	which	was	theoretically	lower	than	goldsmiths,	carpenters,	etc,
but	miles	higher	than	travelling	minstrels,	woodcutters,	potters,	and	the	rest.	I
was	not	permitted	to	walk	on	the	road	when	those	belonging	to	higher	castes,
decided	to	use	the	road.	But	I,	in	turn,	had	the	right	to	kick	a	potter	if	he	dared
to	cross	my	path.	My	purity	was	besmirched	if	I	touched	a	woodcutter,	but,	in
turn,	if	I	ever	touched	a	carpenter,	I	could	cause	impurity.	None	of	these	castes
belonging	to	the	lowest	rung,	could	walk	on	the	streets	or	wear	good	clothes
or	have	fine	houses	or	enter	the	temples	–	all	of	which	reserved	for	the	people
of	the	 other	three	varnas.	 It	 was	 a	 perverse	 system	 and	 depended	 on	 the	 base
emotions	 of	 man	 to	 inflict	 humiliation	 on	 those	 under	 him.	 I	 would	 have	 to
accept	any	insult	from	a	higher	caste	person,	because	I	had	the	right	to	torture
those	 below	 me.	 And	 then,	 gripping	 poverty	 cast	 a	 pall	 of	 doom	 over	 the
dispirited	Asura	populace.
After	about	nine	months,	a	terrible	famine	broke	out	in	the	south	of	India

and	 on	 the	 islands.	 Trade	 came	 to	 a	 standstill	 as	 the	 Brahmins	 decried	 that
crossing	the	black	waters	of	the	ocean	would	result	in	losing	one’s	caste.	The
merchant	class,	in	fear	of	losing	their	newly-found	privileges,	refused	to	go	to
sea	and	soon	the	Chinese	and	yellow	haired	barbarians,	took	over	the	trade	of
spices	 and	 fine	 things.	 Soon	 there	 was	 nothing	 to	 eat.	 But	 Vibhishana’s	 tax
collectors	 showed	 no	 mercy	 in	 extracting	 the	 last	 morsel	 due	 to	 the
government.	 There	 was	 one	 person	 who	 could	 have	 worked	 a	 miracle	 to	 set
right	the	leaky	dams	and	canals,	and	restart	the	farming	in	the	countryside.	But
the	mad	scientist	Mayan,	was	now	a	prisoner	in	chains,	held	in	a	dungeon.	The
Brahmins	laughed	at	his	theories	and	proclaimed	all	that	he	had	achieved	had
been	the	result	of	black	magic	of	the	Asuras.
It	 was	 a	 dark	 time	 indeed.	 There	 seemed	 no	 hope	 of	 escape	 other	 than
through	 death.	 We	 were	 lucky	 if	 we	 got	 one	 square	 meal	 a	 week.	 The	 only
good	 thing	 was	 that	 I	 had	 built	 a	 small	 thatched	 house	 with	 the	 logs	 and
furniture	 I	 had	 stolen	 during	 the	 disturbed	 times	 following	 Ravana’s	 death.	 I
had	 buried	 the	 gold	 ornaments	 I	 had	 taken	 from	 Ravana’s	 corpse,	 inside	 my
house.	I	was	afraid	to	take	them	out.	A	man	of	the	dhobi	caste	was	not	supposed
to	 own	 valuable	 things.	 In	 the	 first	 week	 of	 his	 reign,	 Vibhishana	 had	 seized
any	 personal	 wealth	 of	 the	 lower	 castes.	 But,	 like	 me,	 many	 had	 buried	 their
wealth.
When	 all	 seemed	 lost,	 a	 flicker	 of	 hope	 came	 in	 the	 form	 of	 a	 rumour.
Varuna	had	been	transporting	people	illegally	to	the	countries	of	the	Far	East.
No	 scriptures	 could	 touch	 or	 Brahmins	 excommunicate	 men	 like	 Varuna.	 He
made	money	whether	Kubera,	Ravana,	or	Rama	ruled.	He	served	only	one	god
–	money.	I	was	initially	sceptical,	but	when	the	pangs	of	hunger	grew	and	the
nagging	of	my	woman	became	unbearable,	I	decided	to	give	it	a	try.	No	sooner
had	I	vaguely	expressed	my	wish	to	migrate,	than	an	agent	came	to	arrange	it
for	me.
The	agent	was	a	middle-aged	man	of	probably	my	own	age.	But	since	he
did	not	face	poverty	and	hunger	like	me,	I	must	have	looked	like	an	aged	uncle
to	 him.	 To	 my	 great	 irritation	 and	 the	 amusement	 of	 my	 wife,	 he	 insisted	 on
calling	 me	 ‘Uncle’.	 He	 was	 a	 government	 officer,	 having	 started	 his	 career
with	Kubera,	and	was	now	a	senior	official	in	Vibhishana’s	administration.	He
claimed	 he	 was	 a	 liberal	 and	 did	 not	 think	 too	 highly	 of	 the	 new	 caste	 rules.
However,	 for	 his	 wife’s	 sake,	 he	 did	 not	 wish	 to	 enter	 my	 house	 as	 he	 was	 a
few	notches	above	me	in	the	caste	hierarchy.	He	also	refused	any	refreshments
as	 his	 wife	 would	 not	 have	 approved	 of	 his	 touching	 anything	 prepared	 by	 a

dhobi.	I	fumed,	but	my	wife	appeared	relaxed.	We	didn’t	have	anything	to	offer
him	anyway,	so	his	insistence	on	caste	purity	saved	us	some	embarrassment.
We	met	under	an	old	tamarind	tree	near	the	river.	He	sat	on	a	protruding
root	of	the	tree	and	then	the	haggling	began.	Twice	he	pretended	to	walk	away
from	 the	 deal	 and	 once	 I	 did	 the	 same.	 He	 kept	 telling	 me	 that	 he	 was	 an
important	 government	 officer	 and	 did	 not	 care	 for	 the	 small	 commission	 the
low	castes	could	pay.	But	it	was	evident	that	he	was	desperate	to	fix	the	deal	as
he	stood	to	gain	an	agent’s	commission	from	both	sides.	Varuna	did	not	pay	his
agents	well,	so	they	threatened,	cajoled	and	coaxed	the	maximum	money	out	of
the	wannabe	emigrants.	We	nearly	came	to	blows,	but	my	wife	took	me	aside
and	tried	to	bring	some	sense	to	my	agitated	mind.
Reluctantly,	I	returned	home	and	after	half	an	hour	of	digging	and	much
heart	 burn,	 I	 walked	 back	 to	 meet	 the	 greedy	 public	 servant,	 with	 Ravana’s
ornaments	trembling	in	my	hands.	There	was	a	gleam	in	the	agent’s	eyes	as	the
gold	glittered	in	the	moonshine.	The	bureaucrat	had	been	chatting	to	my	wife
about	 the	 general	 state	 of	 affairs	 and	 how	 difficult	 it	 now	 was	 for	 a	 middle
class	family	to	live,	with	spiralling	prices,	the	rising	cost	of	education	and	so
on.	 He	 absentmindedly	 took	 the	 gold	 in	 his	 hands	 and	 weighed	 it.	 He	 was	 all
smiles	after	that.	It	was	all	fixed.	A	canoe	would	take	us	to	a	ship	anchored	in
the	 high	 seas,	 within	 two	 days.	 We	 just	 had	 to	 get	 in	 and	 would	 be	 assured	 a
first	 class	 passage	 to	 the	 lands	 of	 the	 Far	 East.	 He	 sang	 the	 praises	 of	 the
eastern	lands,	where	there	was	plenty	of	work	to	be	had	and	gold	coins	could
be	 casually	 picked	 up	 from	 the	 streets	 that	 were	 paved	 with	 gold.	 He	 left	 us
when	the	moon	had	risen	directly	overhead	and	the	traffic	had	thinned	on	the
street.	Mala	and	I	stood	hand	in	hand	under	the	old	tamarind	tree	by	the	river
like	two	love	struck	teenagers,	listening	to	the	sweet	rippling	of	the	river	and
smelling	the	faint	fragrance	of	Jasmine	that	wafted	on	the	breeze.	Perhaps	life
was	offering	us	another	chance.	Who	knew?
The	canoe	did	not	come	for	two	weeks	and	I	was	sick	with	worry.	Twice	I
walked	all	the	way	to	the	office	where	the	fat	officer	had	told	us	he	worked	and
was	 unable	 to	 meet	 him	 both	 times.	 Then,	 when	 I	 had	 almost	 given	 up,	 on	 a
very	 dark	 night,	 there	 was	 a	 discreet	 tap	 on	 the	 door.	 I	 woke	 and	 hurriedly
pushed	aside	the	terrifying	images	of	one	such	dark	night,	decades	ago,	when
Deva	marauders	had	come	visiting	my	humble	hut	on	the	banks	of	the	Poorna.
I	waited	for	another	tap.	When	it	came,	I	slowly	opened	the	door	and	saw	the
ghostly	face	of	the	fat	officer	lit	by	a	flickering	lamp.	He	grinned	and	gestured
to	 me	 to	 come	 out.	 I	 opened	 the	 door	 and	 he	 thrust	 a	 palm	 leaf	 at	 me.	 There

were	two	or	three	dark	figures	hiding	in	the	shadows.
I	went	back	in	and	woke	my	wife.	She	became	excited	when	she	heard	that
our	 ticket	 to	 paradise	 had	 come.	 Quickly	 she	 picked	 up	 our	 meagre
belongings,	packed	in	a	cloth	bundle,	and	followed	me	out.	We	walked	to	the
river	 where	 a	 canoe	 was	 waiting.	 There	 were	 three	 other	 couples	 and	 a	 holy
man,	in	the	canoe.	Silently	we	got	into	the	canoe	and	waited.	After	a	delay	of
half	an	hour,	another	couple	joined	us	and	the	fat	man	waved	cheerfully	to	all
of	us.	The	canoe	slowly	drifted	towards	the	river	mouth,	carried	by	the	current.
Lanka,	 the	 land	 I	 had	 adopted	 and	 spent	 the	 major	 part	 of	 my	 life	 in,	 slowly
drifted	away	from	us	as	I	sat	choked	with	conflicting	emotions;	lonely	among
so	many	people,	all	lost	in	their	own	thoughts	and	dreams.
A	 dark	 ship	 loomed	 large	 in	 the	 distance.	 Slowly	 the	 canoe	 approached
the	ship.	A	rope	ladder	dangled	on	its	side.	One	by	one,	we	were	hauled	up.	We
stood	on	the	deck	of	the	large	ship,	waiting	for	somebody	to	take	us	to	our	first
class	cabins.	After	some	time,	a	clerk	came	in	with	a	palm	leaf.	He	checked	the
tickets	and	ordered	the	passengers	to	their	respective	cabins.	I	had	struck	up	a
conversation	 with	 a	 young	 couple	 and	 learnt	 that	 they	 had	 been	 recently
married.	 The	 girl	 was	 coy,	 with	 lovely	 almond	 eyes,	 and	 the	 boy	 looked
innocent	and	handsome.	They	had	sold	their	coconut	grove	to	a	Brahmin	and
had	taken	passage.	The	girl’s	name	was	Arasi	and	the	boy,	Shiva.
When	 the	 clerk	 approached	 us,	 we	 stopped	 our	 chatter	 and	 handed	 him
our	tickets	respectfully.	He	frowned	and	asked,	“Which	caste	you	are?”
“Why	does	that	matter	to	you?”	Shiva	was	irritated.
“You	people	look	so	dark	and	uncouth,	you	might	be	of	the	untouchable
pariah	caste.	I	cannot	take	you	on	board.	The	other	high	caste	passengers	may
object.”
“What	do	you	mean	you	cannot	take	us	on	board.	We	paid	the	full	amount
for	the	passage.”	I	intervened	before	Shiva	did	something	rash	and	foolish.
“I	 don’t	 know.	 There	 appears	 to	 be	 some	 mix	 up.	 The	 company	 will
refund	your	money	within	six	months,	once	you	go	to	our	office	in	the	capital
and	apply	for	the	refund.	I	am	sorry	but	I	cannot	take	you.	You	can	get	down
now	as	the	canoe	has	not	left.	Or	else	you	may	be	forced	to	swim	back.”	The
clerk	turned	to	go	down	to	his	cabin.
“Give	 me	 your	 necklace,”	 my	 wife	 commanded	 the	 perplexed	 Arasi.
Reluctantly	the	girl	unclasped	the	only	precious	thing	she	had	left	and	gave	it	to
Mala,	who	thrust	it	into	my	hands	and	whispered,	“Fall	at	his	feet	and	somehow
save	the	situation.	We	cannot	go	back.”

I	almost	dove	to	catch	hold	onto	one	of	the	clerk’s	feet.
“Hey	 you!”	 He	 kicked	 me	 with	 his	 free	 leg.	 ‘How	 dare	 you	 touch	 and
pollute	me?	Get	out!	Get	out	I	say,	you	old	rascal.”
But	I	did	not	let	go.	In	my	most	pitiable	voice	I	cried,	“Swami,	please	do
not	 send	 us	 off.	 We	 cannot	 go	 back.	 We	 shall	 scrub	 the	 deck	 and	 clean	 the
toilets	but	please	take	us	with	you.	Do	not	forsake	us.	You	are	our	God.	Here	is
a	small	offering	for	you.	Have	pity	on	us	Swami.”	I	held	the	necklace	up	so	he
could	have	a	good	look	at	it.	When	he	saw	it,	he	forgot	all	about	impurity	and
grasped	the	treasure	with	alacrity.	I	stood	up,	crossed	my	hands	over	my	chest,
tucked	 my	 palms	 under	 my	 armpits,	 and	 bowed	 my	 back	 in	 supplication.	 My
companions	took	their	cue	from	me	and	stood	with	all	the	humility	they	could
muster.
He	once	again	checked	his	leaf	and	after	pocketing	the	necklace,	told	us
with	the	air	of	granting	us	a	great	favour,	“Go	down	to	the	lower	deck.	I	don’t
want	to	see	your	dark	faces	until	we	reach	the	city	of	the	Lion.	Make	yourself
useful	 by	 scrubbing	 the	 kitchen	 floors,	 washing	 the	 dirty	 linen,	 and	 cleaning
the	toilets.	Hurry!”
With	that,	he	prodded	me	down	the	stairway	that	led	to	the	lower	decks,
being	careful	not	to	come	into	contact	with	any	of	us.	The	others	followed	me.
It	was	dark	and	dirty	on	the	lowermost	deck	and	the	odour	of	stale	garlic	and
rotten	onions	came	from	the	kitchen.
We	 almost	 broke	 our	 backs	 working	 on	 Varuna’s	 ship,	 constantly
cleaning	utensils,	scrubbing	floors,	washing	linen,	and	emptying	the	toilet	cans
into	the	sea.	We	hardly	saw	sunlight	and	the	constant	rolling	and	heaving	of	the
massive	 wooden	 ship	 made	 us	 sick.	 Eventually,	 after	 a	 journey	 of	 almost	 a
month,	we	heard	the	joyous	shout	of	men	from	the	upper	deck,	celebrating	the
sighting	 of	 land.	 We	 crept	 to	 the	 upper	 deck	 and	 the	 bright	 sunshine	 almost
blinded	us.	There	was	the	mouth	of	a	river	and	verdant	forests	running	on	its
either	side.	Mangroves	stretched	as	far	as	the	eye	could	see	and	the	tall,	black
spire	 of	 a	 temple	 came	 into	 view	 as	 the	 ship	 entered	 the	 wide	 river.	 We	 had
never	 seen	 a	 river	 as	 wide	 and	 excitement	 flooded	 our	 veins.	 Soon	 the	 ship
decked	at	a	port	where	strange	looking	men	wearing	white	turbans,	ran	around
loading	and	unloading	the	goods	from	the	ships.
The	 clerk	 smiled	 sheepishly	 at	 us	 and	 vanished	 down	 the	 ladder	 to	 mix
with	 the	 crowds.	 After	 some	 confusion,	 we	 decided	 to	 leave	 for	 land	 and
slowly	 got	 down.	 Already	 a	 queue	 had	 formed	 at	 the	 ticketing	 office	 of
Varuna’s	shipping	service,	and	I	decided	to	enquire	whether	this	was	the	city	of

the	Lion	in	the	east.	The	first	few	people	I	asked,	stared	back	at	me	with	blank
faces.	 But	 I	 finally	 found	 a	 man	 as	 dark	 skinned	 as	 us	 and	 picked	 up	 enough
courage	to	approach	him.	He	was	talking	to	two	tall	and	fair	men	and	I	waited
for	a	chance	to	speak.	Then	I	asked	him	in	Tamil,	whether	this	was	the	city	of
the	 Lion.	 He	 stared	 at	 me	 as	 if	 I	 was	 mad	 and	 then	 asked,	 “Have	 you	 idiots
come	in	on	Varuna’s	ship?”
We	looked	at	each	other	and	a	chill	spread	in	our	hearts.	“Why,	Swami,
why	are	you	asking.	.	.?”
The	black	man	said	something	in	Sanskrit	to	his	fair	companions	and	they
all	burst	out	laughing.	Then	he	turned	to	me	and	said,	“What	caste	are	you?”
“Dhobi,	Swami,”	I	answered,	though	I	was	not	sure	what	caste	Arasi	and
Shiva	belonged	to.
“No	wonder	you	people	are	so	stupid.	This	is	the	city	of	the	Goddess	Kali.
Varuna	has	duped	you	as	he	has	done	to	many	others.”
Arasi	 let	 out	 a	 loud	 wail	 and	 sat	 on	 the	 ground,	 beating	 her	 head.	 Mala
soon	joined	her.	I	seethed	with	impotent	rage.	Tears	sprang	from	my	eyes	and	I
joined	the	women.	An	embarrassed	Shiva	begged	the	black	man	for	a	solution
to	our	problem.	He	tried	to	shove	us	away,	but	Shiva	was	persistent.	Finally,	the
black	 man	 bid	 good-bye	 to	 his	 fair	 friends.	 Then	 he	 turned	 towards	 us	 and
shouted	at	us	to	shut	up	so	that	he	could	think.	Finally	he	said,	“See	friends,	this
is	a	small	town.	You	may	get	a	job	here,	but	there	is	another	big	city	up	northwest,	called	Ayodhya,	where	King	Rama	rules.	That	city	is	booming	now	and
there	are	plenty	of	jobs	for	coolies	like	you.	The	wages	are	good,	I	have	heard.
Try	your	luck	there.	There	is	a	rice	barge	sailing	up	to	Ayodhya	through	the
Sarayu	river.	The	owner	is	a	merchant	who	migrated	from	the	south.	I	will	put
in	a	word	and	if	you	are	lucky,	you	could	get	some	space.	For	tonight,	there	is
a	 place	 near	 the	 temple	 of	 Kali	 where	 they	 serve	 the	 poor	 free	 meals.	 Have
food	there	and	come	at	sunrise	to	the	Rice	Ghat.	Now,	do	not	cry	for	what	has
happened.	 Perhaps,	 it	 is	 all	 for	 your	 good.”	 Saying	 this,	 he	 pointed	 us	 in	 the
direction	of	the	Kali	temple.	“And	do	not	take	the	front	road.	Outcastes	are	not
allowed	 through	 that	 road,	 take	 the	 small	 path	 at	 the	 back.”	 he	 shouted	 as	 he
jumped	into	a	small	boat	and	floated	down	the	river.
The	night	we	spent	in	the	city	of	Kali,	we	did	not	go	hungry.	We	got	some
food	 at	 the	 temple,	 late	 at	 night.	 I	 could	 not	 sleep	 as	 I	 could	 hear	 the	 roar	 of
tigers	from	the	mangrove	jungles	nearby	and	mosquitoes	buzzed	in	my	ears.	I
was	also	curious	about	Ayodhya.	It	was	perhaps	a	year	since	Rama	had	flown
away	in	the	Pushpaka	with	his	brother	and	wife,	to	Ayodhya.	The	Vanaras	had

carried	off	as	much	loot	as	they	could	physically	haul,	and	left	on	foot	and	by
ship,	within	a	few	months.
As	 day	 dawned	 we	 boarded	 the	 rice	 barge	 and	 sailed	 towards	 Ayodhya.
After	 three	 days,	 we	 reached	 Rama’s	 capital.	 The	 city	 had	 grown	 from	 the
small	village	it	had	been	when	I	had	seen	it	three	decades	earlier,	with	Ravana’s
conquering	army.	Though	it	was	no	match	for	the	glitter	of	Trikota	or	Muzuris
in	their	heyday,	there	was	now	an	air	of	prosperity.	But	certain	things	had	not
changed.	Cows	roamed	the	streets	freely,	blocking	the	traffic	and	lying	down
wherever	 they	 pleased	 but	 the	 lower	 caste	 and	 dark-skinned	 people	 were	 not
allowed	where	even	dogs,	swine	and	cows	could	roam.	There	were	open	drains
with	swine	and	rats	playing	in	them.	A	perpetual	stink	enveloped	the	city.
We	roamed	around,	terrified	that	we	could	be	breaking	some	caste	taboo
or	 the	 other	 by	 walking	 through	 streets	 where	 we	 were	 not	 allowed.	 All	 the
signs	were	in	Sanskrit	and	people	spoke	in	that	strange	tongue,	which	we	did
not	 understand.	 We	 were	 pushed	 and	 shoved	 angrily	 and	 soon	 attracted	 the
attention	of	the	city	police.	We	were	taken	to	the	local	police	station	where	they
tried	 questioning	 us	 in	 various	 ways.	 Rama’s	 police	 were	 no	 different	 from
Ravana’s	 police.	 They	 beat	 me	 with	 their	 lathis	 and	 kicked	 Shiva,	 while	 the
woman	screamed	and	cried.
Finally,	 they	 brought	 in	 a	 man	 who	 ran	 a	 shop	 across	 the	 street,	 who
could	 speak	 Tamil.	 We	 told	 him	 how	 we	 had	 landed	 up	 in	 Ayodhya	 and	 he
translated	 it	 to	 the	 police.	 The	 policemen	 laughed	 at	 our	 folly	 and	 after	 their
merriment	was	over,	asked	the	shop	owner	to	enquire	about	our	castes.	When
they	heard	that	we	belonged	to	the	dhobi	caste,	they	directed	him	to	take	us	to
where	 our	 caste	 brethren	 lived.	 The	 shop	 keeper	 protested.	 Perhaps	 he	 was
reluctant	 to	 leave	 his	 shop	 unmanned.	 But	 after	 the	 policeman	 lashed	 him,	 he
understood	what	was	important.
The	 dhobi	 colony	 was	 by	 the	 river	 and	 stretched	 far	 to	 the	 north.	 The
merchant	showed	us	the	colony	and	vanished	before	we	could	even	thank	him.
The	colony	was	a	city	unto	itself.	There	were	people	belonging	to	all	races	–
Asuras,	 Nagas,	 Kinnaras,	 Gandharvas,	 coal	 black	 barbarians,	 yellow	 skinned
Chinese,	yellow	haired	barbarian	races	from	some	cold	countries,	and	people
of	mixed	race.	But	they	all	belonged	to	one	caste,	dhobi.	Here,	in	the	north,	the
caste	system	was	ancient	and	entrenched.	One	belonged	to	the	lowest	caste	of
one’s	 parents,	 though	 one	 may	 not	 have	 resembled	 either	 of	 them.	 Races	 had
mixed	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 but	 one’s	 caste	 remained	 the	 same.	 The	 system
was	established	and	a	caste	headman	decided	what	was	best	for	the	whole	caste

and	so	ruled	like	a	king.
We	were	taken	to	the	headman,	who	interviewed	us	and	allotted	us	a	hut
near	the	river.	A	tenth	of	our	monthly	earnings	were	to	go	to	the	caste	treasury,
which	 obviously	 the	 old	 head	 man	 controlled.	 We	 could	 not	 complain	 as	 we
needed	 a	 roof	 over	 our	 heads	 and	 food.	 We	 took	 possession	 of	 our	 hut	 and
began	a	new	life.
There	was	no	concept	of	plumbing	or	closed	drains	in	the	Deva	countries
and	 we	 had	 to	 relieve	 ourselves	 in	 the	 open,	 near	 the	 river.	 The	 river	 where
everyone	 defecated	 and	 the	 buffalos	 bathed,	 was	 considered	 sacred,	 and
drinking	water	for	the	city	was	supplied	from	the	same	place	where	we	washed
dirty	linen.	Slowly	our	life	found	its	own	rhythm.	We	picked	up	Sanskrit	and
were	 able	 to	 communicate	 better	 with	 our	 neighbours.	 As	 long	 as	 we	 kept	 to
our	 place	 and	 did	 not	 aspire	 to	 be	 anything	 higher,	 the	 straight-laced	 caste
system	 of	 the	 Devas	 worked	 well.	 The	 government	 collected	 tax	 through	 the
headman,	who	then	negotiated	his	own	percentage.	No	policeman	or	any	other
government	 official,	 ever	 entered	 the	 dhobi	 village.	 It	 would	 have	 been	 the
same	with	the	potters	or	weavers	villages.
Once	 a	 fortnight,	 we	 went	 to	 the	 market	 outside	 the	 city	 and	 bought
whatever	 we	 needed.	 Life	 was	 simple	 and	 straightforward,	 with	 none	 of	 the
complexities	 of	 the	 freewheeling,	 fiercely	 competitive,	 urban	 world	 of	 the
Asuras.	 The	 caste	 system	 was	 brutal	 and	 the	 indignities	 heaped	 on	 the	 lower
castes	 were	 inhuman,	 but	 inside	 one’s	 own	 caste	 village,	 there	 was	 a	 strange
kind	of	equality,	with	the	possible	exception	of	the	headman’s	family.	No	upper
caste	members	entered	the	village.
One	 of	 the	 greatest	 advantages	 of	 this	 Deva	 system	 was	 the	 lack	 of
competition.	Each	task	was	assigned	to	a	caste	and	all	the	members	of	the	same
caste	were	assured	of	a	job	and	two	square	meals.	Unlike	Ravana’s	cities,	like
Trikota	 or	 Muzuris	 or	 Gokarna	 or	 Mahabalipuram,	 where	 different	 cultures
and	 races	 mingled;	 where	 people	 dared	 to	 dream	 about	 making	 it	 big;	 where
trade,	science,	art	and	architecture	flourished;	where	urbanity,	planning,	design
and	aesthetics	all	had	their	place;	where	fiercely	competitive	men	and	women
fought	in	different	spears	of	life	to	create	a	mark	in	the	world;	where	men	of
immeasurable	 talent	 and	 scientists	 like	 Mayan	 flourished;	 but	 which	 also
forced	a	huge	population	that	had	fallen	back	in	the	rat	race	to	live	in	inhuman
slums,	barely	able	to	keep	body	and	soul	together;	Rama’s	cities	like	Ayodhya
or	 Mithila,	 were	 different.	 These	 cities	 were	 an	 agglomeration	 of	 selfcontained	 caste	 villages	 that	 interacted	 with	 each	 other	 for	 their	 minimum

needs.	 Unlike	 the	 dynamic	 and	 brutally	 competitive,	 materialistic,	 yet
magnificent	 cities	 of	 the	 Asuras,	 the	 cities	 of	 Rama	 presented	 a	 picture	 of	 a
closed	 and	 static	 world,	 with	 the	 caste	 system	 forming	 its	 foundation.	 It	 put
each	 one	 firmly	 in	 their	 place,	 depending	 on	 the	 accident	 of	 birth.	 In	 this
system,	dreams	had	no	chance	and	aspirations	were	dangerous.	We	immigrants
would	soon	discover	this.
Life	went	on	smoothly	and	as	the	years	passed,	Arasi	gave	birth	to	a	son.
We	named	him	Shambuka,	after	Shiva.	The	boy	grew	fast	and	was	intelligent
beyond	his	years.	Slowly	I	found	happiness	in	my	life.	In	playing	with	the	boy,
teaching	him	to	swim,	training	him	to	hunt	for	small	birds,	I	had	rediscovered
my	youth.	I	had	stopped	doing	hard	work	for	several	years	and	Shiva,	who	had
become	a	son	to	me,	took	on	the	additional	burden.	He	was	such	a	hardworking
man	and	enterprising	too.	He	had	begged	and	bribed	his	way	to	get	the	contract
for	washing	the	palace	linen	and	it	was	our	ticket	to	worldly	success.	That	he
was	able	to	prosper,	was	perhaps	due	to	the	inherent	competitive	nature	of	his
Asura	 heritage	 that	 was	 aroused	 when	 the	 opportunity	 presented	 itself.	 We
expanded	 our	 home	 and	 added	 two	 cows	 to	 the	 donkeys	 we	 already	 had.	 We
were	 slowly	 moving	 up	 in	 life.	 My	 days	 were	 spent	 gazing	 at	 the	 calmly
flowing	river;	the	serene,	cloud-filled	sky;	the	barges	that	floated	lazily	down
the	river;	and	the	wild	Herons	and	Kingfishers	that	dove	into	the	water	for	fish.
Many	 times	 Shambuka	 accompanied	 me	 on	 these	 excursions,	 calling	 me
Grandpa	and	nagging	me	for	something	or	the	other.	My	heart	filled	with	joy
and	pride	whenever	I	heard	his	boyish	prattle	and	once	again	I	started	to	fall	in
love	with	this	beautiful	life	and	this	wonderful	world.

63	Childish	dreams
Bhadra
It	is	always	when	everything	appears	dream-like	and	life	seems	to	possess
a	 never-ending	 charm,	 that	 foolish	 thoughts	 and	 dangerous	 aspirations	 take
birth	in	the	minds	of	humans.	Shambuka	was	intelligent	and	handsome,	but	that
was	 no	 reason	 for	 Arasi	 to	 think	 that	 he	 should	 grow	 up	 to	 be	 more	 than	 a
washerman.	 Once	 such	 thoughts	 enter	 a	 mother ’s	 mind,	 that	 her	 child	 is
special,	 nothing	 can	 shake	 them	 free.	 She	 wished	 her	 son	 to	 be	 an	 important
official,	or	perhaps	a	famous	poet,	or	a	great	merchant	–	anything	other	than	a
lowly	dhobi.	I	warned	her	that	people	like	us	should	not	dare	to	dream.	Shiva
also	tried	to	reason	with	her	but	she	remained	adamant.	Mala	joined	Arasi	in
demanding	 that	 Shambuka	 be	 educated.	 The	 women	 reasoned	 that	 we	 had
money	and	the	boy	had	talent,	so	why	should	he	be	left	illiterate?	But	the	boy
was	eight	years	old	and	it	was	too	late.	Had	he	lived	in	one	of	the	Asura	cities,
he	 would	 have	 become	 fairly	 competent	 in	 reading,	 writing	 and	 mathematics
by	then.
They	kept	nagging	and	finally,	against	my	objections	and	protests,	Shiva
relented	and	decided	to	find	a	way	to	send	the	boy	to	school.	I	did	not	like	the
decision,	 but	 was	 fairly	 confident	 that	 no	 one	 would	 teach	 a	 dhobi’s	 son
anything,	so	I	was	not	overly	worried.	But	I	had	not	taken	into	account	the	fact
that	 money	 can	 break	 even	 the	 most	 strict	 taboos.	 Shiva	 found	 a	 teacher	 who
was	almost	a	recluse,	living	across	the	river.
On	the	other	side	of	the	river	Sarayu,	lay	a	thick	jungle.	With	the	fowls
and	 beasts,	 there	 lived	 a	 few	 ascetics	 who	 did	 nothing	 other	 than	 smear	 their
bodies	 in	 ashe,	 wear	 skulls	 and	 bones	 as	 ornaments,	 and	 sometimes	 stand	 in
difficult	 and	 acrobatic	 postures	 for	 hours	 together.	 Ostensibly	 they	 were	 in
search	of	God,	or	their	inner	selves,	or	brahman,	but	they	were	a	seedy	crowd

who	did	not	fit	in	with	the	rigid	caste	system	of	the	Devas	and	found	sanctuary
in	 their	 reclusiveness.	 As	 a	 rule	 they	 were	 addicted	 to	 intoxicants	 and	 a	 few
punished	 themselves	 in	 exotic	 ways.	 The	 common	 people	 were	 afraid	 of	 this
motley	crowd	and	whispered	in	hushed	tones	about	their	mystical	powers.	I	had
ventured	many	times	to	those	parts	and	had	struck	up	conversations	with	a	few
of	 them.	 They	 were	 surprisingly	 blind	 to	 casteism	 and	 I	 went	 there	 for	 the
freedom	their	company	 offered.	They	 were	the	only	 people	 who	 never	asked
me	about	my	caste	and	some	were	even	happy	to	share	a	drink	or	a	smoke	with
me.	That	was	my	secret	world.
Shiva	had	found	one	of	the	ascetics	who	could	not	have	cared	less	about
caste	 purity.	 He	 loved	 his	 wine	 from	 the	 city	 and	 yearned	 for	 some	 herbs	 to
smoke.	I	was	deputed	to	supply	him	with	his	fees,	in	exchange	for	his	services
in	teaching	Shambuka.	I	found	myself	enjoying	his	company	and	his	herbs.	He
was	a	learned	man,	equally	well	versed	in	Sanskrit,	Tamil,	Naga,	Gandharva,
and	Kinnara	dialects,	and	a	handful	of	barbarian	languages.	He	was	also	well
versed	 in	 the	 Brahmin	 Vedas,	 astrology	 and	 other	 sciences.	 Shambuka	 could
not	have	had	a	better	teacher.	The	ascetic	only	insisted	that	he	be	called	Guru.
In	 one	 of	 his	 drunken	 spells,	 he	 spelt	 out	 his	 earlier	 life.	 He	 was	 a
Brahmin	from	the	land	of	the	five	rivers,	but	had	travelled	to	Ayodhya	in	his
early	youth.	He	had	done	odd	jobs	and	was	on	the	verge	of	making	it	big	as	a
government	 official,	 but	 became	 disgusted	 with	 the	 caste	 system,	 though	 it
gave	him	privileges	as	a	Brahmin.	He	was	in	Ayodhya	when	Rama	relinquished
his	 right	 of	 inheritance	 to	 respect	 his	 father ’s	 vows	 and	 had	 witnessed	 the
meeting	of	the	young	Deva	prince	and	the	saint	Jabali.	Jabali	had	argued	with
Rama,	trying	to	convince	him	that	there	was	nothing	called	God	or	afterlife	or
soul,	and	one	had	to	live	this	life	and	enjoy	it	till	one	died.	But	the	puritan	and
self-righteous	Rama,	had	refused	to	accept	all	the	logical	reasoning	of	Jabali
and	 had	 left	 for	 the	 forest	 with	 his	 young	 wife	 and	 his	 younger	 brother.
However,	Guru	had	been	impressed	by	Jabali	 and	had	impulsively	 decided	to
relinquish	 his	 high	 paying	 government	 job	 and	 become	 his	 follower.	 When
Dasratha,	Rama’s	father,	had	been	King,	he	tolerated	all	shades	of	opinion	and
Jabali	 was	 allowed	 to	 roam	 free	 in	 the	 city,	 declaiming	 the	 absurdity	 of	 the
caste	 system.	 But	 when	 Bharata,	 the	 younger	 brother	 of	 Rama,	 ascended	 the
throne	in	the	name	of	Rama,	he	hunted	down	any	dissenting	men	and	ensured
the	orthodoxies	were	kept	intact.
Jabali	 and	 his	 followers	 had	 been	 banished	 to	 the	 other	 bank	 of	 the

Sarayu,	 and	 soon	 other	 men	 with	 differing	 opinions	 and	 schools	 of	 thought,
also	found	asylum	on	that	bank.	Jabali	was	dead	but	his	traditions	lingered	on,
along	 with	 the	 other	 conflicting	 schools	 of	 thought.	 After	 Jabali’s	 death,	 his
followers	took	it	as	a	mission	to	educate	as	many	as	possible,	irrespective	of
caste.	But	over	the	years,	the	iron	grip	of	the	system	had	tightened	and	only	a
few	dared	to	become	educated.	Those	who	did,	escaped	from	India	to	the	lands
across	the	mountains,	to	China,	or	to	the	lands	beyond	the	seas,	where	only	the
merit	of	a	man	mattered	and	not	his	accident	of	birth.
Shambuka	listened	to	all	this	with	eyes	wide	open	and	I	was	disturbed	by
the	strange	gleam	in	them.	Later,	when	I	would	row	him	back	across	the	inky
black	waters	of	the	Sarayu,	he	would	speak	of	his	dream	of	becoming	a	great
poet	 who	 would	 mesmerize	 his	 audience	 with	 his	 dazzling	 poetry.	 I	 kept
rowing	as	the	young	boy	brimmed	with	life	and	promise.	Then	one	night,	with
a	million	stars	as	witness,	with	the	cold	waters	of	the	Sarayu	rippling	over	the
heart	 of	 India	 and	 the	 silver	 moon	 reflecting	 in	 his	 black	 curls,	 Shambuka
broke	 into	 melodious	 song.	 He	 sang	 about	 a	 world	 of	 freedom,	 a	 world	 of
hope,	of	a	tomorrow	that	was	never	to	be.	His	song	dissolved	in	the	breeze	that
caressed	the	lowly	huts	of	the	poor	and	curled	around	the	palace	towers	where
the	 Gods	 resided	 in	 the	 guise	 of	 men.	 I	 reached	 the	 shore	 of	 the	 Dhobi	 Ghat
when	the	lights	had	gone	out	in	most	homes.	The	boy	had	fallen	asleep.	With	a
heavy	heart,	I	tied	up	the	boat	and	carried	the	sleeping	boy	home	on	my	tired
shoulders.

64	The	sword	of	dharma
Bhadra
As	 the	 days	 passed	 by,	 the	 boy	 developed	 wonderfully.	 His	 voice	 grew
rich	in	its	tenor	and	his	verses	became	lyrical.	People	began	to	wait	at	the	Ghat
for	our	boat	to	return	at	night.	His	songs	reached	the	shore	before	the	prow	of
our	boat	disturbed	the	little	pool	of	golden	light	near	the	shore	where	men	and
women	 sat	 listening	 rapturously	 to	 the	 sweet	 voice	 that	 wafted	 over	 the	 dark,
gently	 rippling	 water.	 Every	 night,	 as	 I	 walked	 my	 little	 boy	 through	 the
admiring	 crowd,	 with	 his	 small	 fingers	 clasped	 firmly	 around	 my	 wrinkled
wrist,	 the	 audience	 sometimes	 sung	 with	 him,	 sometimes	 clapped	 to	 the
rhythm,	 or	 silently	 wept	 with	 him.	 He	 sang	 in	 Sanskrit,	 but	 the	 emotions	 that
pulsed	were	universal	and	the	yearnings	that	radiated	were	primeval.	It	struck	a
chord	with	everyone	who	chanced	to	hear	it	even	once.	It	penetrated	the	thick
muck	of	religion,	caste	and	custom	that	had	pasted	itself	over	men’s	hearts	and
instead,	appealed	to	the	inner	goodness	of	all	human	beings.
As	his	fame	grew,	my	fear	increased.	I	tried	to	prevent	him	from	going
out	of	our	little	caste	village,	to	make	him	understand	that	outside,	a	dark	and
cruel	world	was	waiting	to	snap	him	up,	a	world	inhabited	by	Gods	and	their
chosen	 men,	 who	 would	 brook	 no	 challenge	 to	 their	 supremacy.	 But	 the	 boy
had	tasted	the	sweetness	of	freedom.	He	could	not	be	tied	to	a	stinking	village
of	 outcastes	 with	 the	 chains	 of	 tradition.	 He	 was	 at	 a	 stage	 of	 life	 when
everything	 appeared	 sunny	 and	 bright	 and	 the	 future	 spread	 ahead	 infinitely
with	grand	promises.	That	was	the	danger	of	education.
It	 gave	 birth	 to	 dreams	 that	 had	 no	 legs	 to	 stand	 on	 firmly	 in	 the	 real
world.	I	tried	to	reason	with	him,	saying	that	as	per	the	Vedas,	we,	the	outcastes,
were	not	supposed	to	learn	anything	other	than	our	caste	duties.	Not	that	I	knew
much	 about	 the	 Vedas,	 other	 than	 what	 I	 had	 heard	 about	 from	 the	 Brahmin

priests,	 who	 quoted	 obscure	 phrases	 for	 no	 rhyme	 or	 reason.	 Instead,	 he
surprised	me	with	his	clear	rendition	of	the	Vedas	and	translated	the	meaning
for	me.	He	challenged	me	to	show	him	a	single	verse	that	sanctioned	caste.
I	 did	 not	 care	 whether	 the	 Vedas	 sanctioned	 caste	 or	 not.	 But	 this	 was	 a
revelation	to	me.	As	an	Asura,	I	had	been	taught	to	hate	all	that	was	considered
holy	 by	 the	 Devas.	 Shambuka	 said	 that	 his	 Guru	 had	 taught	 him	 the	 real
meaning	of	the	Vedas	and	they	were	not	the	monopoly	of	any	single	caste	or
profession.	 They	 were	 a	 collection	 of	 the	 thoughts	 of	 poets	 who	 had	 lived
thousands	of	years	ago,	who	came	from	varied	professions	such	as	fishermen,
priests,	 woodcutters,	 potters,	 hunters	 and	 many	 more.	 It	 was	 only	 later	 that
selfish	 men	 appropriated	 the	 Vedas	 for	 their	 own	 means	 and	 used	 them	 as	 a
convenient	tool	to	beat	others	with.
Shambuka	had	 become	 too	smart	 for	his	own	good.	I	wanted	to	 murder
that	Brahmin,	that	disciple	of	Jabali,	who	had	muddled	up	my	little	Shambuka’s
brain.	Even	if	all	the	things	he	said	were	true,	they	were	dangerous	truths	and
not	to	be	uttered	even	in	private.	And	that	Brahmin	had	taught	my	naïve	little
grandson	to	sing	it	in	public.	I	pleaded	with	the	boy	but	he	remained	adamant.	I
pleaded	with	the	father	and	mother	of	the	boy,	and	my	wife	too,	but	they	were
all	in	a	dream	world,	misty-eyed	at	the	success	of	their	little	one	in	the	world.
He	 began	 to	 go	 out	 of	 the	 village	 and	 sing.	 He	 quoted	 eloquently	 from	 the
Vedas	 and	 then	 added	 spice	 to	 his	 speech	 with	 logic	 and	 the	 rendering	 of
folktales.	 Men	 and	 women	 flocked	 to	 hear	 the	 little	 boy’s	 sweet	 voice.	 They
crowded	 onto	 the	 streets	 and	 showered	 him	 with	 flowers.	 He	 became	 too
famous	for	his	own	good.
Then	 it	 happened.	 It	 was	 inevitable,	 so	 I	 was	 not	 shocked.	 The	 boy	 was
confronted	 on	 the	 royal	 highway	 by	 a	 group	 of	 priests	 who	 did	 not	 wish	 the
lower	castes	to	pollute	the	highway.	The	boy	refused	to	move	and	challenged
them	 on	 the	 very	 authority	 which	 they	 themselves	 used	 to	 condone	 such	 an
atrocious	thing.	Enraged,	the	head	priest	rumbled	forth	some	obscure	Sanskrit
verses,	which	he	imagined	would	intimidate	this	low	caste	rascal.	The	boy,	with
his	 head	 full	 of	 the	 knowledge	 his	 Guru	 had	 imparted,	 challenged	 the	 priests
with	 accepted	interpretations	of	the	verses	as	 well	 as	 his	own	version.	By	the
time	the	news	reached	me	and	our	family	had	rushed	to	the	spot,	a	huge	crowd
had	gathered	to	watch	the	debate.	The	crowd	cheered	whenever	the	boy	opened
his	mouth	to	render	a	melodious	verse	in	Sanskrit.
The	crowd	had	forgotten	all	the	taboos	assiduously	built	by	the	Brahmins
about	who	should	use	the	public	road	and	when,	and	who	could	or	could	not

touch	 whom,	 along	 with	 all	 the	 other	 complicated	 rules	 of	 the	 caste	 system.
They	 jostled	 together,	 polluting	 each	 other	 and	 getting	 polluted	 by	 touch	 and
sight,	 just	 to	 hear	 Shambuka	 sing.	 The	 boy	 questioned	 the	 rituals	 and	 the
sacrifices,	just	as	his	Guru	had	taught	him,	and	he	challenged	the	idea	of	caste
and	 the	 supremacy	 of	 one	 human	 being	 over	 another,	 based	 merely	 on	 the
accident	of	birth,	as	the	crowd	cheered	him	on.
The	high	priests	of	the	kingdom	were	getting	more	and	more	agitated	as
the	boy	continued	to	question	them,	not	using	the	rational	atheistic	arguments
as	the	master	of	his	Guru,	Jabali,	would	have	done,	but	using	the	verses	from
the	 Vedas	 and	 the	 Upanishads.	 He	 recited	 verses	 from	 the	 Vedas	 and	 then
translated	them	into	Prakrit	for	the	common	people	on	the	street	to	understand.
The	crowd	howled	and	cheered	madly	as	I	grew	more	and	more	uneasy
with	every	passing	moment.	Shambuka	asked	the	questions	which	everyone	on
street	had	always	wanted	to	ask,	but	had	never	dared	to.	He	asked	for	the	truth
and	 I,	 from	 the	 vantage	 of	 my	 advanced	 years	 knew	 what	 the	 fate	 seekers	 of
truth	 had	 always	 met	 with.	 With	 growing	 trepidation	 I	 watched	 the	 army
surround	 the	 crowd.	 I	 could	 sense	 a	 change	 in	 the	 mood	 of	 the	 crowd.	 The
cheering	grew	less	and	less	in	volume	and	slowly	died	altogether.	There	was
tension	in	the	air	but	the	boy	seemed	unaware	of	what	was	happening	around
him.	In	the	thick	silence	that	enveloped	thousands	of	impotent,	cowardly	men
and	women,	his	voice	rose	in	a	sweet	melody.
A	chariot	came	in	fast	and	stopped	at	the	corner	where	Shambuka	stood	in
a	trance,	reciting	the	Vedas	loudly	and	sweetly.	From	the	chariot,	King	Rama
stepped	down.	The	priests	ran	to	him	and	whispered	something	in	his	ear.	He
became	uneasy	and	shook	his	head.	He	looked	as	if	he	was	pleading	with	his
priests,	 but	 the	 head	 priest,	 a	 dark,	 fat	 man	 with	 an	 immense	 torso,	 angrily
demanded	something	of	the	king.	The	King’s	shoulders	sank	as	he	heard	what
his	priests	were	telling	him.	He	moved	forward	as	if	to	wake	Shambuka	from
his	 trance.	 The	 crowd	 waited	 with	 baited	 breath.	 But	 the	 fat	 priest	 moved	 inbetween	and	saved	the	great	King	from	such	a	polluting	touch.	Shambuka	also
sensed	something	and	woke	from	his	trance.	He	looked	bewildered	at	the	sight
before	 him.	 The	 boy	 became	 afraid	 and	 started	 to	 cry.	 The	 crying	 broke	 the
spell.	He	was	no	longer	a	great	poet	and	singer	who	could	move	men	to	tears.
He	was	just	a	small	boy	of	fourteen,	a	mere	untouchable,	a	black	Asura	and	a
non	 entity.	 He	 looked	 at	 his	 King	 and	 protector	 and	 made	 a	 deep	 bow.	 Rama
again	looked	helplessly	at	his	priests,	who	angrily	pointed	at	the	boy,	shouting.
The	 King	 raised	 his	 hands	 to	 shut	 up	 the	 Brahmins	 and	 asked	 the	 boy,

“Son,	who	are	you?”
“I	am	Shambuka,	son	of	Shiva,”	the	boy	murmured.
“What	caste	are	you?”
“I	do	not	have	a	caste,	nor	do	you.”	The	boy	looked	into	the	eyes	of	the
king.
“Is	it	true	that	you	are	an	untouchable?”
“I	am	not	untouchable,	nor	is	anyone	else.”
“Are	you	an	atheist?”
“I	am	a	firm	believer	in	God,	who	is	within	each	one	of	us.	I	am	God	and
so	are	you.”
“Who	granted	permission	for	a	Shudhra	to	learn	the	Vedas?”	Rama	was
getting	angry	now.
“Do	 the	 birds	 need	 permission	 to	 fly?	 Do	 the	 fish	 swim	 on	 someone’s
authority?	 Learning,	 for	 humans,	 is	 like	 swimming	 for	 fish	 or	 flying	 for
birds.”
“You	 arrogant	 fool!	 Do	 you	 know	 the	 punishment	 meted	 out	 in	 our
kingdom	 to	 the	 lower	 castes	 who	 are	 arrogant	 enough	 to	 break	 their	 caste
dharma?”	The	head	priest	barked	at	Shambuka.
Rama	 looked	 at	 the	 priests,	 pleading.	 He	 had	 the	 same	 look	 on	 his	 face
when	his	wife’s	purity	was	tested	by	fire.	He	knew	what	the	boy	said	was	true,
and	 his	 eyes	 betrayed	 infinite	 compassion	 for	 the	 small	 boy	 whose	 soulstirring	 song	 rose	 above	 the	 murmurs	 of	 the	 crowd.	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 priests
again.
In	 answer	 to	 this	 question,	 Shambuka	 broke	 into	 a	 Sanskrit	 song	 from
some	obscure	Upanishad	that	said	death	was	nothing	but	a	temporary	address
change	for	the	soul,	and	just	as	a	man	changed	his	clothes	when	they	were	old
and	tattered	and	bought	new	clothes,	the	soul	too,	sought	a	new	body.	I	should
really	 have	 had	 a	 word	 with	 that	 Guru	 who	 had	 taught	 such	 nonsense	 to	 my
little	boy.	When	would	people	learn	the	simple	things	–	that	death	was	the	end
and	if	you	died,	your	body	rotted	and	dissolved	in	the	soil.
The	 fat	 priest,	 now	 raised	 his	 voice	 and	 told	 the	 crowd,	 “This	 Shudhra,
this	arrogant	untouchable,	has	dared	to	break	the	most	important	of	caste	rules.
Not	only	has	this	Shudhra	dared	to	become	literate,	he	has	gone	to	the	extent	of
learning	the	holy	Vedas.	And	he	is	misinterpreting	what	is	written	in	the	Holy
Books.	There	is	only	one	fate	that	awaits	such	arrogant	hotheads.”
He	looked	at	King	Rama	with	the	air	of	a	man	who	has	said	what	he	knew
to	be	right	and	now	the	responsibility	to	act	on	those	words	had	shifted	to	the

others.	 A	 tremor	 passed	 through	 the	 crowd.	 The	 soldiers	 closed	 into	 a	 tight
circle,	with	their	swords	drawn,	spears	pointed	towards	the	crowd,	waiting	for
any	 idiot	 who	 was	 foolish	 enough	 to	 move.	 A	 crow	 cawed,	 punctuating	 the
thick	 silence.	 I	 trembled	 at	 the	 thought	 of	 what	 was	 coming.	 Rama	 had	 his
sword	 drawn	 now.	 Shambuka’s	 cheeks	 were	 wet	 from	 his	 tears	 and	 his	 little,
innocent	face	wore	an	expression	of	someone	who	had	tried	his	best	and	failed.
He	 looked	 tired	 beyond	 his	 years.	 I	 could	 hear	 the	 thump	 thump	 of	 some
women	 washing	 dirty	 linen	 far	 away,	 which	 gave	 an	 eerie	 rhythm	 to	 the	 hot,
sweltering	day.	It	as	if	someone	or	something	had	begun	a	countdown.	When	I
had	counted	fourteen	thumps,	Rama’s	mighty	sword	came	swishing	down	and
severed	the	head	of	my	little	grandson.
The	show	was	over.	The	crowd	dispersed	to	their	homes,	some	excitedly
talking	 to	 each	 other,	 others	 going	 about	 their	 business	 as	 if	 nothing	 had
happened.	 I	 pushed	 towards	 the	 place	 where	 Shambuka	 lay	 without	 his	 head.
Rama’s	 chariot	 flew	 past,	 cutting	 the	 thinning	 crowd	 in	 two.	 Soldiers	 pushed
men	and	women	out	of	its	way	to	ensure	a	smooth	passage	for	the	fleeing	king,
to	his	palace.	I	wanted	to	jump	in	front	of	the	chariot	and	pull	the	man	down
from	the	lofty	pedestal	he	clung	to;	drag	him	down	through	the	mud	and	grab
his	 bleeding	 sword,	 the	 sticky,	 red	 one	 that	 had	 severed	 my	 little	 boy’s	 neck,
and	thrust	it	deep	into	his	heart.	Instead,	I	stood	feeble	and	whimpering,	gaping
at	the	disappeared	man	in	his	speeding	chariot,	immersed	in	my	messy	grief.
As	 I	 stood	 watching	 helplessly,	 the	 chariot	 disappearing	 in	 a	 cloud	 of
dust,	it	suddenly	veered	to	the	left	and	stopped.	Soldiers	ran	to	the	royal	chariot
and	a	commotion	developed.	I	dragged	myself	there	to	see	what	had	happened.
For	 a	 moment,	 I	 wished	 that	 Rama	 has	 been	 assassinated,	 but	 then	 I	 ruefully
remembered	 that	 such	 things	 as	 natural	 justice	 exist	 only	 in	 the	 wistful
imaginations	of	idealists.	I	was	too	old	a	dog	to	be	tempted	with	that	kind	of
bone.
Rama	 stood	 before	 a	 distraught	 Arasi	 and	 Mala,	 embarrassment	 and
anger	 written	 clearly	 on	 his	 face.	 The	 women	 had	 blocked	 the	 King’s	 path.
Animal	screams	came	from	the	mother ’s	mouth	as	she	tore	her	hair	in	despair.
Mala	beat	her	breasts	with	a	violence	that	surprised	me.
“Why	did	you	kill	my	little	one?	What	were	you	afraid	of?	You.	.	.”
Soldiers	 rushed	 to	 push	 away	 the	 women	 from	 the	 path	 of	 the	 God.	 But
Rama	 stopped	 them	 with	 a	 flick	 of	 his	 hand.	 “Mother,	 your	 son	 broke	 the
sacred	rules	of	the	land	and	as	King,	I	had	to	protect	the	dharma.”

Arasi	spat	on	the	ground	and	viciously	barked	at	the	King,	“Sacred	laws.	.
.dharma.	.	.	If	your	dharma	needs	to	be	protected	from	a	little	boy,	by	killing
him,	if	dharma	is	afraid	of	a	few	Sanskrit	words	uttered	by	a	child,	think	if	you
can,	you	ruler	of	this	sacred	land,	what	sort	of	dharma	you	are	protecting	and
whose	hands	hold	the	strings	that	control	you.	.	.”
Rama	 stood	 speechless,	 his	 Brahmin	 aides	 glowering	 at	 the	 little,	 dark
woman	 who	 had	 asked	 questions	 which	 no	 one	 else	 had	 even	 dared	 to	 think
about.	I	pushed	my	way	towards	the	scene,	but	before	I	could	reach	the	spot,	the

soldiers	had	whisked	the	women	away.	When	she	was	being	dragged	through
the	 street	 by	 her	 hair,	 Arasi	 cursed	 her	 King	 with	 all	 the	 rage	 of	 a	 helpless
mother	 whose	 only	 child	 had	 been	 killed,	 “You	 will	 pay	 for	 this	 Rama,	 you
will	pay	for	this.	You	may	be	a	champion	of	some	smritis	that	treat	the	helpless,
the	poor,	the	weak,	and	women,	like	worms,	but	mark	my	words.	.	.never	again.
.	.never	again.	.	.will	you	know	what	happiness	is.	There	is	a	dharma,	the	law	of
the	natural	world,	that	is	bigger.	.	.stronger	than	all	these	verses.	That	dharma
will	 come	 for	 you…”	 She	 kept	 screaming	 but	 the	 curses	 grew	 fainter	 and
fainter	and	slowly	died	away	as	the	soldiers	dragged	her	away	from	the	King.
The	 crowd	 gawked	 at	 this	 scene,	 enjoying	 the	 drama.	 They	 would	 talk
about	this	for	a	long	time.	Before	I	reached	the	chariot,	I	heard	the	whip	fall	on
the	 poor	 horses’	 backs	 with	 vengeance	 and	 the	 chariot	 shot	 forward	 to	 the
safety	of	the	palace	walls.	I	stood	there	coughing	and	choking	in	the	swirling
dust	 that	 had	 arisen	 in	 the	 wake	 of	 the	 royal	 chariot.	 I	 was	 drenched	 in	 sweat
and	 stooped	 by	 the	 weight	 of	 the	 dharma	 that	 was	 crushing	 us.	 The	 crowd
melted	 away.	 I	 collapsed	 on	 the	 dusty,	 red	 earth	 and	 cried	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 I
cried	for	my	little	boy	and	his	parents,	for	my	other	son	whom	I	had	adopted	as
my	 own,	 but	 who	 was	 claimed	 by	 Kings	 and	 Gods	 for	 their	 own	 glory.	 But
more	than	anything,	I	cried	for	my	blasted	country.	I	clenched	the	earth	in	both
fists	and	screamed,	“Cry	my	mother,	for	the	kind	of	rulers	you	beget.	.	.worse.	.
.cry	my	mother,	for	the	kind	of	men	you	breed.	.	.
Someone	kicked	me	in	the	ribs.	I	tried	to	get	up	but	he	kicked	me	again.
He	 kicked	 me	 into	 the	 open	 drain.	 “Drunken	 beggar,	 I	 would	 have	 run	 over
you,	you	idiot.	Why	have	you	chosen	my	cart	to	commit	suicide?	Son	of	a	low
caste.”	 It	 was	 a	 merchant	 hurrying	 to	 the	 market	 to	 make	 more	 money	 and	 I
was	lying	in	his	way	and	trying	to	reform	my	country.	He	kicked	me	into	the
place	that	I	deserved.	.	.the	stinking	drain.	I	lay	in	an	open	drain	of	Ayodhya	and
watched	the	world	go	by	without	bothering	about	anything	that	had	happened.	I
also	watched	them	carry	away	the	body	of	my	little	Shambuka	to	the	Ghat	to
cremate.
It	was	past	midnight	when	the	merriments	in	the	palace	and	in	the	homes
of	 the	 noble	 and	 the	 rich	 ended	 and	 I	 reached	 my	 tiny	 hut.	 I	 imagined	 for	 a
moment	my	little	one	coming	out	with	a	song	on	his	lips.	But	then,	had	he	not
gone	to	the	land	of	nothing,	for	saving	dharma?	Perhaps,	in	his	next	birth,	he
would	be	born	as	a	high	caste	boy	so	that	he	could	torment	others	born	from
darker	 wombs.	 There	 was	 something	 soothing	 about	 that	 thought.	 I	 did	 not

have	the	courage	to	enter	the	house	and	walked	towards	the	river	and	lay	down
on	a	fallen	tree.
As	 I	 drifted	 in	 and	 out	 of	 sleep,	 I	 could	 hear	 a	 faint	 tune	 that	 the	 breeze
carried	 across	 the	 dark	 waters	 of	 the	 Sarayu.	 Some	 naïve	 idiot,	 maybe	 that
rascal	 Brahmin	 Guru	 of	 Shambuka’s,	 was	 singing	 about	 a	 world	 that	 did	 not
have	borders,	a	tomorrow	without	wars,	a	society	that	did	not	discriminate,	and
other	 such	 nonsense.	 I	 wished	 someone	 would	 choke	 that	 idealistic	 fool	 to
death	so	that	no	more	innocent	ones	would	be	corrupted	by	such	implausible
dreams	and	sacrifice	their	precious	lives	for	nothing.	There	was	no	escaping
from	 the	 idealists	 of	 the	 world.	 They	 breed	 like	 rat	 and	 infest	 the	 world	 like
plague.	 When	 they	 die,	 they	 take	 so	 many	 lives	 with	 them.	 To	 my	 growing
irritation,	 the	 song	 picked	 up	 in	 temper	 and	 vigour	 and	 when	 it	 became	 too
bothersome	with	its	idiotic	themes	of	equality,	I	walked	to	my	hut	and	hugged
its	deep	darkness	to	find	oblivion.

65	The	beginning
Bhadra
I	had	been	walking	for	the	better	part	of	the	year	but	still	there	were	miles
to	go	before	I	reached	the	village	of	my	birth.	Decades	ago,	I	had	started	my
journey	with	a	young	man	who	promised	us	a	new	world.	He	gave	us	hope	and
filled	 our	 dreams	 with	 new	 yearnings.	 He	 built	 an	 empire	 and	 lost	 it.	 He	 had
gone	to	join	so	many	others	who	dared,	achieved	and	lost.	I	gave	my	youth	for
his	 achievements.	 I	 was	 gullible	 enough	 to	 be	 taken	 for	 a	 ride	 by	 smooth
talking	people	like	Ravana,	who	promptly	made	me	into	a	sucker.	Later,	when	I
had	 lost	 my	 innocence	 and	 the	 world	 had	 taught	 me	 a	 sufficient	 number	 of
lessons,	I	buried	what	was	lost	in	the	soil	of	Lanka,	and	bundled	whatever	little
I	had	left	and	dared	to	venture	again.	I	reached	somewhere	I	did	not	intend	to	be
in	the	first	place,	but	I	started	my	life	again.	What	was	life	in	this	land	without
Gods	and	their	whims?	The	arms	of	the	Gods	caught	up	with	my	puny	little	life
and	shook	it,	squeezed	it,	and	trampled	on	it,	until	the	very	last	drop	of	blood
oozed	out.
After	Shambuka’s	death,	life	became	a	living	hell	in	Ayodhya.	Shiva	tried
to	 drown	his	sorrows	in	liquor	and	the	family	fell	apart	as	families	do	when
their	shared	dreams	wither	away.	I	would	also	get	drunk	and	create	a	scene	on
most	days.	The	drinking	bouts	began	as	an	excuse	to	mourn	for	a	dead	child,
but	later	became	its	own	end.	Both	Shiva	and	I	would	get	drunk	and	then	vent
out	 our	 frustrations	 on	 the	 poor	 women	 of	 the	 house.	 We	 would	 beat	 our
spouses	 mercilessly	 and	 the	 neighbours	 would	 gather	 to	 gawk	 and	 pass	 lewd
comments.	 It	 was	 during	 one	 of	 those	 stupid	 drunken	 bouts	 that	 something
occurred	 which	 changed	 history.	 My	 old	 hag	 hit	 me	 back	 when	 I	 became	 too
drunk	and	I	knew	the	people	in	the	colony	relished	this.	I	wanted	to	get	even	for
the	insults	I	had	suffered.	One	day,	I	was	not	as	drunk	as	I	seemed	and	as	the	old

woman	started	her	tricks,	I	kicked	her	down.	I	screamed	her	entire	past	history
for	the	whole	world	to	hear.	Her	entire	life	story	as	a	whore	in	Lanka,	her	past
lovers,	 her	 being	 raped	 by	 Ravana,	 were	 all	 laid	 bare	 for	 my	 neighbors	 to
drool	over.	I	dragged	her	out	of	my	compound	and	pushed	her	into	the	street
saying	that,	I	was	neither	Rama	or	Ravana,	to	accept	a	soiled	wife	as	I	did	not
belong	to	the	high	class	who	swapped	wives.	I	thumped	my	chest	and	said	that	I
belonged	to	a	good	middle	class	family	that	valued	morality	and	honour	above
all	 and	ignored	the	 jeering	 laughter	 all	around	 me	as	I	kicked	my	 screaming
wife	again.	Then	I	left	for	the	wine	tavern	for	another	round	of	drinks.
I	was	arrested	two	hours	later.	I	was	scared	when	they	dragged	me	to	the
royal	palace.	They	took	me	before	Rama	himself	as	he	sat	in	his	full	glory	on
the	 throne	 of	 India.	 I	 did	 not	 know	 what	 particular	 laws	 of	 the	 Vedas	 I	 had
inadvertently	 broken	 and	 what	 punishment	 awaited	 me.	 I	 bowed	 deeply,	 my
nose	almost	touching	the	ground.	One	of	the	soldiers	prodded	me	to	stand	up
and	face	the	King.
Rama	frowned	at	me	and	gestured	for	one	of	his	ministers	to	question	me.
That	same	fat,	dark	Brahmin	minister	came	forward	and	stood	exactly	as	far	as
he	 was	 supposed	 to	 stand	 from	 an	 untouchable.	 Then	 he	 asked	 me	 about	 my
comment	 on	 Rama.	 I	 denied	 everything	 related	 to	 the	 King,	 but	 soon	 the
pressure	became	too	great.	I	did	not	dare	mention	Ravana’s	name	in	the	court
of	 his	 sworn	 enemy	 and	 so	 I	 said	 that	 I	 was	 not	 as	 large	 hearted	 as	 Rama	 to
accept	a	wife	whose	chastity	was	suspect.	It	was	a	twisted	truth,	but	that	was	the
best	I	could	manage	in	those	circumstances.	The	durbar	went	 silent	and	 there
were	many	accusing	faces	and	Rama	turned	red	with	embarrassment.
To	 my	 surprise,	 I	 was	 let	 off	 without	 any	 punishment.	 I	 left	 Rama’s
cabinet	 huddled	 together	 in	 deep	 discussion,	 as	 if	 the	 future	 of	 the	 world
depended	 on	 one	 dhobi’s	 drunken	 comment.	 It	 was	 more	 than	 an	 hour	 later
when	I	reached	the	shrine	where	Ravana’s	old	flying	machine	was	kept.	I	stood
at	 a	 distance	 to	 watch	 the	 amusing	 sight	 of	 pious	 people	 bowing	 down	 with
great	reverence	before	the	Pushaka	Vimana,	when	suddenly	a	chariot	clattered
past	 me	 at	 great	 speed.	 A	 distraught	 Sita	 sat	 in	 the	 rear	 seat	 and	 a	 scowling
Lakshmana	whipped	the	horses	with	terrifying	violence.	I	did	not	think	about	it
then	 and	 walked	 to	 the	 tavern	 for	 another	 drink.	 It	 was	 only	 later,	 when	 the
neighbours	 accused	 us	 of	 having	 shattered	 the	 royal	 family,	 did	 I	 come	 to
know	the	chain	of	events	my	drunken	comment	had	set	in	motion.	The	Pundits
had	 decided	 that	 Sita	 was	 impure	 and	 that	 whatever	 test	 and	 penance	 she	 had
undergone	 to	 prove	 her	 chastity	 in	 Lanka	 was	 not	 valid	 in	 Ayodhya.	 They

advised	 Rama	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 this	 blot	 from	 his	 stainless	 life	 and	 he	 decided	 to
send	 his	 pregnant	 wife	 into	 the	 forest.	 The	 King’s	 wife	 had	 to	 be	 above
suspicion.	His	logic	worked	in	curious	ways.	The	palace	parasites	claimed	that
the	King	was	abiding	by	the	wishes	of	his	subjects	as	he	had	always	done.
Life	 became	 more	 miserable	 day	 by	 day,	 with	 the	 family	 situation
deteriorating	 beyond	 hope.	 We	 were	 almost	 excommunicated	 from	 our	 caste
and	the	laundry	jobs	that	came	our	way	were	few	and	far	between.	Whatever	we
could	 scrape	 together,	 Shiva	 and	 I	 spend	 on	 liquor.	 The	 women	 suffered	 and
were	 sick	 most	 of	 the	 time,	 but	 we	 did	 not	 care.	 Ten	 years	 passed,	 with	 life
getting	bleaker	and	bleaker.
It	was	then	that	our	King	thought	that	he	ought	to	proclaim	his	suzerainty
over	the	whole	of	India.	His	advisors	told	him	to	conduct	an	Aswamedha	Yajna,
when	they	would	release	a	horse	to	roam	free.	Wherever	the	horse	went,	that
place	 would	 belong	 to	 the	 King	 and	 those	 who	 contested	 this,	 would	 have	 to
fight	 and	 defeat	 Rama.	 There	 were	 many	 wars	 with	 the	 surrounding	 petty
kingdoms	 and	 they	 each	 surrendered	 as	 Rama	 succeeded	 in	 establishing
himself	as	the	avatar	of	Vishnu.	Indra,	the	titular	king	of	the	Devas,	had	taken
refuge	in	an	obscure	hill	kingdom	in	the	Himalayas	and	was	soon	forgotten	by
all.	 It	 was	 when	 the	 horse	 entered	 a	 nearby	 jungle	 that	 the	 farce	 of	 palace
politics	came	to	life.
The	horse	was	stopped	by	two	young	boys	who	happened	to	be	the	twins
borne	by	Sita	in	her	exile	in	the	forest.	Everyone	knew	it	and	proclaimed	the
twins	were	invincible.	The	news	went	to	a	pleased	King,	who	condescended	to
go	 to	 the	 spot.	 The	 royal	 family	 was	 reunited	 as	 the	 King	 found	 that	 his
banished	 wife	 had	 given	 birth	 to	 twin	 sons.	 She	 had	 been	 living	 in	 the
hermitage	 of	 the	 poet-saint,	 Valmiki.	 But	 what	 should	 have	 been	 a	 happy
reunion,	 turned	 into	 a	 tragic	 tale,	 due	 to	 the	 handiwork	 of	 Rama’s	 advisors.
They	 declared	 Sita	 to	 be	 impure	 and	 her	 chastity	 was	 cast	 in	 doubt	 since	 she
had	lived	under	the	same	roof	as	the	poet	Valmiki.	Valmiki	was	the	most	saintly
person	 I	 had	 ever	 seen	 and	 it	 was	 evident	 that	 he	 treated	 Sita	 like	 his	 own
daughter.	 But	 there	 was	 no	 questioning	 the	 learned	 men’s	 logic.	 Another	 fire
was	lit	on	a	cliff	overlooking	the	Sarayu	river	and	people	flocked	to	witness
Sita	proving	her	chastity	again	by	entering	the	flames.
I	 was	 sitting	 in	 my	 usual	 tavern	 when	 the	 news	 reached	 us	 that	 the	 King
had	 found	 his	 exiled	 wife	 and	 asked	 her	 to	 jump	 into	 a	 fire	 to	 prove	 her
chastity	again.	I	picked	a	fight	with	a	bald,	old	man	who	irritated	me	by	singing
paeans	 to	 Rama.	 I	 shouted	 questions	 at	 him.	 “Why	 did	 the	 King	 go	 into	 exile

for	fourteen	years	at	the	whim	of	his	step-mother	when	the	whole	city	wanted
him	to	stay?	Was	he	not	aware	of	the	wishes	of	his	subjects	then?	Why	did	he
kill	 Bali	 through	 deceit?	 What	 was	 the	 justification	 for	 sending	 his	 pregnant
wife	away	when	she	had	committed	no	wrong?	Why	was	he	pushing	her	again
and	 again	 into	 the	 fire?	 Why	 did	 he	 kill	 Shambuka?	 It	 soon	 developed	 into	 a
heated	 row	 with	 people	 joining	 in	 on	 both	 sides	 and	 violently	 beating	 and
pummelling	each	other	with	abandon.	The	tavern	toughies	kicked	all	of	us	out
and	 I	 cursed	 myself	 for	 my	 foolish	 outburst	 that	 had	 ended	 in	 my	 missing	 a
drink.	After	a	while	I	returned	to	the	tavern	for	another	round,	but	the	bouncers
threw	me	out.	Desperate,	I	walked	towards	the	cliff	where	the	preparations	for
the	trial-by-fire	for	Sita	were	going	on.
It	 seemed	 like	 the	 usual	 circus,	 with	 hangers-on,	 sweetmeat	 vendors,
wooden	 toy	 peddlers,	 and	 palmists,	 jostling	 for	 space	 with	 excited	 men	 and
women	 who	 wanted	 to	 witness	 the	 miracle.	 I	 was	 directed	 towards	 a	 space
allotted	to	my	caste	men	and	I	joined	them	to	enjoy	the	drama.	The	sun	blazed
with	a	vengeance	and	we	were	getting	baked.	People	howled	and	screamed	in
excitement	 each	 time	 the	 chariot	 of	 some	 official	 passed	 by.	 The	 scene	 in
Lanka,	where	a	similar	farce	had	been	played	out,	kept	coming	vividly	back	to
my	mind.	The	only	difference	was	that	instead	of	tropical	humidity	and	rain,	a
dry,	dusty	wind	blew	from	the	west,	turning	us	into	ghosts.
The	 sun	 had	 moved	 deep	 into	 the	 western	 horizon	 when	 the	 chariot
carrying	 the	 King	 reached	 the	 spot.	 He	 waved	 at	 the	 cheering	 crowd	 and
ascended	onto	the	elevated	platform.	Sycophants	fell	over	each	other	to	make
themselves	indispensable	to	the	King,	who	ignored	them.	A	huge	fire	was	kept
burning	and	it	was	almost	ten	feet	high	now.	Servants	poured	ghee	and	oil	and
fanned	it	to	make	it	burn	more	fiercely.	Then	they	brought	Sita.	Two	ten-year
old	boys	followed,	perhaps	not	comprehending	the	fact	that	their	mother	was
to	be	burnt	alive.
The	 fat	 Brahmin	 priest	 began	 his	 usual	 long-winded	 speech,	 but
mercifully,	 sensing	 the	 mood	 of	 the	 irritated	 and	 impatient	 public,	 ended	 it
sooner	 than	 he	 would	 have	 otherwise.	 Some	 enthusiastic	 and	 ambitious
wannabe	 politicians	 cheered	 Rama	 and	 the	 crowd	 took	 up	 the	 cheers	 with
enthusiasm.	 Sita	 stood	 without	 showing	 any	 emotion,	 silently	 suffering	 the
humiliation	once	again.	Time	froze.
Then	 everything	 happened	 quickly.	 Sita	 performed	 a	 quick
circumambulation	of	the	raging	fire	and	stood	still	for	a	moment.	Slowly	she
looked	 at	 her	 husband’s	 face.	 We	 all	 stood	 with	 bated	 breath.	 Then,	 with	 a

quickness	that	took	everyone	by	surprise,	she	ran	towards	the	river,	away	from
the	fire,	and	vanished	beyond	the	edge	of	the	cliff.	After	a	moment	of	shocked
silence,	 some	 people	 ran	 towards	 the	 cliff	 where	 Sita	 had	 vanished.	 Rama
collapsed	onto	his	seat	in	shock.
I	ran	with	all	the	strength	I	could	pump	into	my	old	legs.	I	ran	against	the
pushing	crowd,	I	ran	past	the	wailing	women,	I	ran	through	the	street	where	the
cloth	 shops	 were	 quickly	 shutting	 up	 and	 bracing	 for	 a	 riot.	 I	 ran	 past	 the
market	where	men	had	overcome	the	initial	shock	and	were	hurrying	back	to
the	safety	of	their	homes,	fearing	the	earthquake	that	follows	in	India	when	a
large	tree	falls.
Perhaps	I	had	succeeded	in	saving	the	little	Asura	princess	at	last	from	the
clutches	of	a	cruel	world.	As	I	left	the	walled	city,	I	wanted	to	jump	in	the	air
and	shout	in	triumph.	I	wanted	to	cry	out	to	my	old	friend	and	master,	Ravana,
that	I	had	done	my	work.	I	had	not	planned	it,	I	had	not	thought	about	it,	but	I
remembered	that	it	had	been	one	of	my	drunken	bouts	that	had	led	to	this	chain
of	 events.	 My	 revenge	 may	 have	 lacked	 the	 glamour	 of	 violence,	 yet	 it	 had
been	 more	 effective.	 No	 books	 would	 be	 written	 about	 me,	 no	 poet	 would
compose	an	epic	in	my	name	–	I	did	not	wish	for	such	glory.	I	danced	on	the
street	and	rolled	in	the	road.	I	kicked	a	sleeping	dog	and	it	yelped	and	scurried
away	in	agony.	By	the	time	I	reached	home,	I	was	totally	exhausted	by	my	joy.	I
hugged	my	old	wife	and	she	pushed	me	away,	but	I	persisted,	and	after	years	of
deprivation,	I	had	my	way	that	night.
Riots	 followed	 and	 many	 people	 died	 for	 no	 reason	 in	 the	 following
fortnight.	 They	 could	 not	 find	 the	 body	 of	 Sita	 at	 all.	 It	 was	 believed	 that	 she
had	been	swallowed	by	the	thick	mud	at	the	bottom	of	the	Sarayu.	I	thought	that
it	was	appropriate	that	the	last	Asura	princess	lay	at	rest	in	the	lap	of	mother
earth.	There	was	no	King	Janaka	now	to	snatch	the	prize	from	the	river	Sarayu,
and	the	river	kept	her	daughter	close	to	her	heart.	I	wondered	how	differently
things	would	have	been	had	I	killed	the	little	girl	as	I	had	been	asked	to	do	by
Prahastha	 so	 long	 ago.	 Perhaps	 there	 was	 nothing	 called	 free	 will	 and	 events
happened	 as	 fated,	 as	 the	 Devas	 say	 they	 are.	 Whatever	 did	 happen	 must	 be
one’s	fate.	Who	knows?
We	were	afraid	to	move	out	of	our	shack	and	watched	the	red	skies	at	the
night	 in	 horror.	 Then	 it	 subsided	 as	 quickly	 as	 it	 had	 begun	 and	 we	 were
relieved	that	we	had	come	out	of	it	safe.	Rama	was	a	broken	man	now,	without
the	will	to	rule.	His	sycophants	started	ruling	in	his	name	and	day	by	day,	the
situation	became	bleaker.	The	King	remained	shut	up	in	his	chamber,	praying

and	 fasting,	 perhaps	 begging	 forgiveness	 of	 his	 beloved	 Sita.	 The	 irony	 was
that	he	was	successful	in	getting	Sita	back	from	the	most	powerful	king	in	the
world,	and	yet	was	powerless	to	save	his	wife	from	the	clutch	of	orthodoxy.	I
grudgingly	admit	that	he	genuinely	cared	about	people.	As	long	as	his	subjects
did	 not	 stray	 from	 the	 straightlaced	 path	 of	 caste	 duties,	 they	 could	 lead	 a
peaceful	life	under	his	rule.	But	the	moment	someone	like	Shambuka	aimed	to
take	their	destiny	into	their	own	hands,	the	long	sword	of	dharma	would	catch
up	with	them.	It	was	difficult	to	be	a	just	ruler	when	the	entire	system	was	based
on	 discriminations	 and	 privileges	 based	 on	 the	 accident	 of	 birth.	 As	 long	 as
Rama	had	some	control,	there	was	an	uneasy	coexistence	between	the	various
castes,	 since	 he	 commanded	 the	 respect	 of	 the	 people.	 But	 after	 Sita&apos;s
death,	 Rama	 became	 withdrawn	 and	 depressed	 and	 the	 orthodox	 caucus	 of
priests	 took	 over	 the	 reins	 of	 the	 kingdom.	 Oppression	 and	 caste	 rules	 grew
more	rigid	and	when	it	became	unbearable,	one	by	one,	families	migrated	out
of	the	city.	We	held	on	for	some	time	as	business	had	slightly	improved	due	to
the	fact	 that	many	families	belonging	to	the	dhobi	 caste	 had	 vanished	 and	 we
had	 less	 competition.	 But	 with	 the	 slight	 increase	 in	 finances,	 Shiva	 and	 I
revived	 our	 drinking	 habits	 with	 vigour	 and	 succeeded	 in	 making	 our	 life
miserable	again.	One	day,	Shiva	stabbed	his	wife	in	one	of	their	usual	quarrels
and	 two	 days	 later,	 she	 died.	 They	 took	 Shiva	 away	 and	 threw	 him	 into	 jail.
Thus,	 the	 only	 relationship	 that	 bound	 us	 to	 Rama’s	 kingdom	 snapped.	 After
lingering	for	a	few	months,	with	a	heavy	heart,	we	decided	to	leave	the	city	and
walk	 southwards.	 The	 euphoria	 I	 had	 felt	 when	 I	 had	 seen	 Rama’s	 distress,
vanished,	 and	 all	 that	 was	 left	 was	 a	 terrible	 sadness.	 Everything	 appeared
meaningless.	We	bundled	our	humble	belongings	together	and	started	our	long
walk.
We	 travelled	 through	 thick	 jungles	 and	 barren	 wastelands.	 There	 were
many	families	migrating	south	and	twice	we	were	attacked	by	bandits	and	those
who	had	something	to	lose,	lost	that.	We	reached	Heheya,	on	the	banks	of	the
Narmada,	near	the	Sahya	mountains	–	the	capital	of	Karthyaveerarjuna,	and	the
city	 seemed	 prosperous	 enough.	 The	 old	 King	 was	 dead,	 killed	 by
Parasurama’s	 militant	 Brahmin	 group.	 His	 son	 ruled	 the	 kingdom	 now.	 We
stayed	for	one	year,	as	the	caste	system	was	not	so	rigid	and	we	found	work.
But	the	local	population	began	to	resent	the	migrants	and	soon	thugs	with	long
sticks	and	narrow	minds	began	to	target	all	newcomers.	What	had	once	been	a
booming	 city,	 soon	 became	 stagnant.	 A	 gang	 of	 thugs	 once	 caught	 me	 in	 the
street	and	beat	me,	calling	me	a	black	south	Indian.	To	escape,	I	tried	speaking

in	 the	 Sanskrit	 I	 had	 picked	 up	 in	 Ayodhya.	 That	 proved	 to	 be	 even	 more
dangerous.	I	was	made	painfully	aware	that	they	hated	north	Indians	even	more
than	south	Indians.	The	city	crumbled	due	to	this	rampant	regionalism	and	the
King	seemed	helpless.
Once	 again	 we	 journeyed	 on,	 and	 when	 we	 reached	 Gokarna,	 the	 city
where	 Mayan	 had	 designed	 and	 built	 the	 grand	 Shiva	 temple	 at	 the	 behest	 of
Ravana,	we	were	too	tired	to	move.	We	decided	to	stay	there	for	some	time,	at
the	edge	of	a	jungle,	far	away	from	the	city	which,	as	outcastes,	we	were	not
allowed	 to	 enter.	 We	 eked	 out	 a	 living	 and	 had	 slowly	 got	 our	 rhythm	 back,
when	Mala	caught	a	fever	and	died.	It	was	sudden	and	unexpected,	though	she
had	past	seventy	years.	It	left	a	huge	void	in	my	heart.	I	buried	her	by	the	river
and	 resumed	 my	 walk.	 I	 was	 near	 Gokarna	 when	 I	 heard	 the	 news	 that	 the
priests	had	made	Rama	order	the	execution	of	Lakshmana.	The	younger	prince
had	 begun	 to	 question	 many	 of	 the	 rigid	 and	 absurd	 practices	 decreed	 by	 the
priests.	He	had	begun	to	take	an	interest	in	governance	and	found	that	many	of
the	 rules	 were	 bizarre	 and	 caused	 sufferings	 to	 the	 common	 people.	 The
economy	was	crumbling	as	skilled	labour	and	artisans	began	migrating	away.
The	 priests	 waited	 for	 their	 chance	 to	 get	 even	 with	 Lakshmana.	 One	 day,	 to
their	 delight,	 Rama	 himself	 gave	 them	 the	 opportunity.	 A	 group	 of	 holy	 men
had	 sought	 a	 private	 interview	 with	 the	 King.	 Lakshmana	 was	 instructed	 by
Rama	not	to	allow	anyone	into	his	chamber	as	he	had	granted	an	interview	to
one	 set	 of	 Brahmins.	 Another	 Maharishi	 insisted	 that	 he	 be	 allowed	 in.	 He
threatened	to	curse	the	entire	clan	of	Rama.	Terrified,	Lakshmana	allowed	him
in	 and	 so	 angered	 the	 other	 group.	 They	 quoted	 at	 length	 from	 various
scriptures	 and	 the	 end	 result	 was	 that	 Rama	 ordered	 the	 execution	 of	 his
brother	for	this	‘grave	crime’.	Thus	ended	Lakshmana,	the	great	warrior	and
slayer	of	Meghanada;	the	man	who	had	left	his	young	wife	in	order	to	follow
his	brother	into	exile	for	14	long	years;	the	man	who	had	served	his	brother
with	utmost	devotion	since	childhood.	All	his	sacrifice,	devotion	and	love	lay
at	 the	 feet	 of	 a	 man	 obsessed	 with	 his	 image	 as	 a	 perfect	 ruler;	 a	 man	 in	 the
control	 of	 his	 advisors;	 a	 man	 who	 suffered	 silently	 and	 gravely,	 yet	 did	 not
dare	to	cross	the	lines	drawn	by	his	priests.
As	 I	 was	 crossing	 the	 river	 Payaswini,	 I	 heard	 of	 Rama’s	 end	 from	 a
travelling	holy	man.	Rama	had	sacrificed	the	two	people	who	he	loved	most,
for	 the	 sake	 of	 his	 dharma.	 He	 became	 more	 and	 more	 depressed	 and
withdrawn	and	finally	found	eternal	solace	in	the	dark	waters	of	the	Sarayu.	It
was	 an	 inglorious	 end	 to	 a	 king	 who	 had	 defeated	 one	 of	 the	 most	 colourful

and	glorious	men	in	history.	Rama	struck	to	letter	of	the	scriptures.	He	led	an
unhappy	 life	 and	 sacrificed	 everything	 -	 his	 wife,	 his	 brother	 and	 his
conscience,	for	that	dharma.	I	still	cannot	forget	the	helpless	look	in	his	eyes
when	 he	 raised	 the	 sword	 against	 my	 little	 Shambuka.	 His	 image	 was	 in
complete	contrast	to	the	man	whom	he	had	vanquished.
Ravana	was	a	man	who	lived	life	on	his	own	terms,	doing	what	he	thought
was	 right	 and	 caring	 nothing	 for	 what	 was	 written	 by	 holy	 men;	 a	 man	 who
lived	life	fully	and	died	a	warrior ’s	death.	Like	their	lives,	beliefs,	values	and
definitions	 of	 dharma,	 the	 manner	 of	 their	 deaths	 were	 also	 contradictory.
However	the	final	truth	remains	that	both	were	actors	in	a	grand	farce	and	it	is
only	the	small	detail	of	who	won,	that	decided	the	hero	and	the	villain,	in	their
epic	life	stories.
As	time	goes	by,	Rama	may	become	God	and	Ravana	the	demon,	for	one
was	putty	in	the	hands	of	the	priests	and	the	other	as	obstinate	as	a	rock,	selfwilled	and	unorthodox.	The	Ravanas	of	the	world	are	dangerous	to	those	who
wish	 to	 use	 the	 scriptures	 for	 their	 own	 purposes	 and	 lord	 over	 others,
exploiting	everyone.	The	Ramas	of	the	world	are	used	by	such	oppressors,	as
models	 to	 justify	 their	 way	 of	 life.	 But	 as	 time	 passes,	 even	 the	 Ramas	 and
Lakshmanas	 become	 dangerous,	 as	 their	 inherent	 humanity	 starts	 rebelling.
When	 the	 hands	 of	 Rama	 shook	 while	 beheading	 a	 little	 boy,	 the	 ungodly
coterie	knew	he	may	turn	dangerous	later.	Deifying	him	was	the	only	solution,
since	 they	 had	 already	 vilified	 his	 enemies.	 They	 are	 thoroughly	 distressed
with	the	Ravanas;	they	can	manage	the	Ramas	for	a	while;	but	what	they	truly
delight	 in	 are	 men	 like	 the	 Vibhishanas,	 Kuberas	 and	 Varunas.	 It	 is	 not	 the
righteous	 and	 straight-jacketed	 like	 Rama	 or	 the	 proud	 and	 rebellious	 like
Ravana,	who	inherit	the	world,	but	the	men	who	do	the	bidding	of	the	fanatics;
men	 who	 can	 kill,	 maim,	 fight	 and	 do	 any	 inhuman	 thing	 in	 the	 name	 of
religion	and	the	scriptures.	For	people	like	me,	those	insignificant,	irrelevant
and	 dumb	 nobodies,	 remembering	 this	 lesson	 is	 the	 basic	 tool	 for	 survival.
Once	 in	 a	 while	 we	 get	 swayed	 by	 the	 peddlers	 of	 impossible	 dreams,	 like
Ravana,	Rama,	Mahabali,	the	guru	of	Shambuka.	.	.	And	we	idiots	who	fight	for
abstract	dreams	and	follow	such	leaders,	pay	the	price,	always.	But	sometimes
dreams	do	not	die	and	survival	becomes	unimportant.	There	may	be	glory	in
living	 and	 dying	 like	 Ravana	 or	 Meghanada,	 there	 may	 be	 satisfaction	 in
standing	 steadfast	 for	 some	 abstract	 idea	 like	 dharma	 and	 sacrificing
everything	like	Rama.	But	such	glories	are	unaffordable	luxuries	for	men	like
me.

After	a	month	of	walking,	I	reached	the	place	of	my	birth.	When	I	saw	the
river	Poorna	as	a	silver	line	in	the	valley,	my	heart	leapt	with	joy.	Memories
came	rushing	back	and	I	felt	choked	with	emotion.	I	climbed	down	as	fast	as	I
could	and	reached	the	river.	I	jumped	into	its	crystal	clear	water	and	swam	like
a	duck.	I	felt	my	youth	return.	I	swam	for	a	long	time,	floating	on	a	thin	layer
of	inexplicable	joy.	I	was	rudely	shaken	from	my	dreams	by	a	stone	that	hit	my
forehead,	“Pariah!	How	dare	you	pollute	this	holy	water?”
As	 I	 scrambled	 up	 the	 steps,	 I	 saw	 a	 group	 of	 high	 castes,	 glowering	 at
me.	I	ran	for	my	life,	away	from	the	waters	that	belonged	to	the	Gods.	Later,	I
came	to	know	that	my	land	has	now	become	God’s	own	country	and	there	is	no
place	 left	 for	 man.	 Parasurama	 has	 succeeded	 in	 overthrowing	 the	 last
opposition	from	the	Asuras	and	has	established	the	most	rigid	and	cruel	caste
system	 imaginable.	 Rama’s	 Ayodhya	 was	 heaven	 compared	 to	 the	 hell
Parasurama	has	created.	Gods	lurk	behind	every	stone;	they	hang	from	every
tree,	hide	at	every	corner	and	make	the	lives	of	humans	miserable.	Parasurama
has	 brought	 sixty-four	 Brahmin	 families	 from	 the	 North.	 The	 elite	 of	 the
defeated	Asuras	have	joined	them	as	their	servants	and	become	their	cruel	and
strong	tools,	to	oppress	all	others.	My	place	of	birth	has	become	a	mad	house
with	perplexing	caste	equations	and	taboos.	I	want	to	run	away	from	this	land
of	God,	as	many	are	doing,	by	sailing	away	across	the	seas	to	the	hot	deserts	to
the	west.	But	I	am	too	old	for	another	journey.	I	was	born	here	and	I	want	to	die
here.	 The	 earth	 is	 bountiful	 in	 my	 land	 and	 it	 does	 not	 discriminate	 between
skin	 colours.	 Coconuts	 and	 jackfruits,	 rabbits	 and	 wild	 berries,	 and	 the	 cool
waters	of	the	Poorna,	these	are	more	than	enough	to	sustain	life	in	my	hunched
and	tired	old	body.
Once	in	a	while,	I	trek	to	the	majestic	falls	in	the	upper	hills	of	the	Poorna
and	sit	watching	the	river	cascading	over	the	rocks.	I	do	not	know	why,	but	it
gives	 me	 peace	 of	 mind.	 I	 sometimes	 wonder	 how	 I	 had	 dared	 to	 jump	 into
these	 majestic	 falls	 as	 a	 boy.	 Sometimes	 I	 lie	 back	 on	 the	 black	 rock	 that
protrudes	over	the	falls	and	look	at	the	vast,	blue	sky	with	little,	puffy	clouds
sailing	 across	 it.	 The	 sound	 of	 the	 waterfall	 fills	 my	 ears,	 along	 with	 the
screech	 of	 parakeets.	 The	 universe	 seems	 eternal,	 infinite,	 and	 without	 any
barriers.	Sometimes	I	feel	it	is	indifferent	to	the	trivial	pursuits	of	man	and	his
strivings.	Sometimes	I	feel	a	gigantic	eye	watching	us.	I	have	long	given	up	my
quest	to	find	meaning	in	life.	Maybe	I	am	just	a	fool,	since	my	colour	is	black.
But	 on	 certain	 days,	 especially	 after	 the	 rains,	 when	 nature	 blooms	 in	 a

myriad	colours	and	the	grass	flowers	with	a	sweet	fragrance,	I	hear	snitches	of
songs	 that	 waft	 across	 the	 river.	 They	 sing	 about	 the	 golden	 times	 when	 the
Emperor	 Mahabali	 ruled	 over	 the	 land,	 when	 every	 human	 was	 considered
equal,	 when	 there	 was	 perpetual	 peace	 and	 no	 fraud	 or	 disaster.	 I	 sometimes
smile	at	the	naivety	of	the	singers.	But	mostly,	a	mixed	feeling	of	sadness	and
hope	fills	my	mind.	Maybe	across	the	river,	there	are	villages	of	black-skinned
people	 like	 me.	 They	 may	 be	 celebrating	 Onam,	 waiting	 for	 the	 return	 of	 a
golden	 era,	 waiting	 for	 a	 king	 who	 is	 long	 dead	 and	 buried	 somewhere	 in	 a
cave	 in	 the	 northern	 Sahyas.	 Yet	 there	 is	 sweetness	 in	 their	 hope.	 There	 is	 a
beauty	 beyond	 words	 in	 the	 impossible	 dreams	 that	 hide	 in	 men’s	 hearts.	 No
holy	books	can	erase	that,	no	taboos	can	bind	that,	and	no	Gods	can	steal	that
away.	Men	may	die,	but	such	hopes	remain.	I	am	old	and	may	die	any	day	like
the	 millions	 who	 leave	 without	 any	 trace	 in	 this	 world.	 Maybe,	 like	 the
Brahmins	say,	I	shall	be	born	again	and	again.	If	so,	that	is	the	greatest	hope.
Every	 death	 is	 a	 temporary	 pause	 in	 the	 symphony	 called	 life.	 There	 is
immeasurable	beauty	in	the	thought	of	returning	to	this	lovely	world	again	and
again.	 Perhaps,	 in	 one	 of	 my	 returns	 to	 this	 wonderful	 world,	 who	 knows,	 I
may	find	that	the	words	of	that	lovely	song	have	come	true.

Acknowledgements
Asura	owes	a	great	debt	to	many	people.	First	and	foremost	I	owe	a	lot	to
my	 parents,	 the	 Late	 L.	 Neelakantan	 and	 Chellamal	 Neelakantan,	 for	 opening
the	 magical	 world	 of	 Indian	 epics	 to	 me.	 I	 also	 owe	 lots	 of	 thanks	 to	 my
brothers,	 Loknathan	 and	 Rajendran,	 who,	 with	 my	 parents	 and	 neighbors,
created	 many	 enchanted	 evenings	 when	 Indian	 philosophy,	 epics,	 and	 folk
stories,	were	discussed	and	debated.	The	role	that	my	sister	Chandrika	and	her
husband	 Parameswaran,	 played	 in	 my	 development,	 both	 as	 a	 person	 and
author,	 cannot	 go	 unacknowledged.	 The	 irreverent	 and	 often	 mischievous
criticism,	 mostly	 unsolicited,	 from	 my	 nieces,	 Divya,	 Rakhi	 and	 nephew
Dileep,	 has	 kept	 me	 from	 indulging	 in	 flights	 of	 fancy	 which	 I	 tend	 to
otherwise	do.	The	book	would	not	have	taken	shape	without	the	heated	debates
I	often	had	and	still	enjoy,	with	my	friend	of	25	long	years,	Santosh	Prabhu.	I
also	owe	thanks	to	Lakshmi	Nair,	who	took	pains	to	correct	my	first	draft,	and
my	 friend	 and	 collegue	 Premjeet	 in	 reading	 and	 correcting	 the	 final	 draft.	 I
also	owe	to	Rajiv	Prakash	who	took	time	to	read	through	the	entire	story	and
patiently	point	out	typos	and	errors.
I	am	grateful	to	the	entire	Leadstart	team	for	giving	Ravana	and	Bhadra
the	opportunity	to	speak	out.	The	encouragement	which	Chandralekha	Maitra,
Editorial	 Director	 of	 Leadstart	 extended,	 was	 phenomenal	 and	 I	 owe	 a	 big
thanks	 to	 her.	 Without	 her	 support	 and	 guidance,	 Asura	 would	 have	 been
nothing	but	a	few	 word	bytes	sleeping	in	my	laptop.	Andrea	Barton	D’souza,
who	went	through	the	painful	process	of	correcting	and	editing	the	draft	of	a
debut	author,	deserves	an	award	for	patience.	I	owe	Mishta	Roy	thanks	for	her
wonderful	cover	design	and	Subu	and	Ashok	of	Amplecreations	Studio,	for	the
illustrations.

The	 book	 would	 not	 have	 been	 possible	 without	 the	 support,	 love	 and
encouragement	of	my	life	partner,	Aparna.	I	owe	her	a	hug.	And	our	two	little
imps,	Ananya	and	Abhinav,	who	are	more	interested	in	the	stories	I	tell	than	the
stories	 I	 write,	 I	 owe	 you	 nothing	 less	 than	 a	 hundred	 stories	 for	 the	 next
hundred	 nights.	 Lastly,	 I	 owe	 gratitude	 to	 the	 unknown	 storytellers	 of	 India,
who	have	kept	alive	the	tradition	of	storytelling	for	three	millennia.	And	to	my
country	and	its	inexhaustible	treasure	trove	of	religious	mythology,	I	owe	the
most.

GLOSSARY
Agni	pariksha
angavasthra
Ashoka
astra
Asura
Atharva
Ayurveda
baksheesh
bhang
bindi
Brahma
Brahman

caste

Trial	by	fire.	In	ancient	India,	a	woman’s	chastity	was	tested	in	this	way;	the	woman	entered	a
burning	pyrand	if	she	emerged	unscathed,	she	was	considered	chaste.
Shawl	worn	by	nobles
An	Indian	medicinal	tree;	in	the	epic	Ramayana,	Sita	spends	her	captivity	in	Ravana's	Lanka,	in
a	grove	of	Ashoka	trees
Arrow/shaft;	epics	often	describe	them	as	having	divine	powers
Hindu	mythology	portrays	Asuras	as	demons	of	darkness	–	the	antithesis	to	Devas,	the	Gods
The	fourth	Veda,	which	speaks	of	magic,	spells	etc	atma	Soul
Ancient	Indian	system	of	medicine
Bribe,	but	with	the	undertone	that	the	receiver	considers	it	his	right,	rather	like	a	tip	or
commission
A	mild	narcotic	made	from	the	female	cannabis	plant
Red	dot	worn	by	Hindu	women	on	the	forehead
One	of	the	Hindu	Trinity	of	Gods	–	Brahma	created	the	universe.	In	this	book,	it	is	the	generic
name	of	an	ancient	tribe	of	Asura	origin
The	one	supreme	power	responsible	for	the	creation	and	existence	of	the	universe,	according
to	Hindu	beliefs
Hindu	society	was	divided	into	four	Varnas	(see	under	Var​na	for	details),	and	further	subdivided	into	various	Jatis	or	castes.	Castes	varied	from	region	to	region	(eg.	a	Brahmin	from
Kashmir	in	the	north	and	Brahmin	from	Andhra	in	the	south,	belonged	to	same	Varna,	but	did
not	intermarry	because	they	belonged	to	different	castes.
Indian	month	when	Spring	begins

Chaitra
Chandagyo
One	of	the	most	important	of	the	Upanishads
Upanishad
Chandrahasa Ravana’s	sword	–	according	to	mythology,	it	was	gifted	to	him	by	Lord	Shiva
A	south	Indian	drum,	beaten	with	a	curved	stick;	even	today	it	is	called	Asura	Vadhya	or
chenda
‘musical	instrument	of	the	Asuras’	and	is	still	used	during	festivals	in	Kerala	and	parts	of	south
Karnataka	and	Tamil	Nadu
Chettis
Merchant	caste	of	south	India;	corruption	of	the	word	Shresti
crore
One	hundred	lakhs
Literally	‘view’;	it	was	customary	for	Indian	monarchs	to	appear	at	a	balcony	and	hear
darshan
petitions	from	their	subjects
Dasamukha Ten-faced
dasa
Servant	or	slave

Rough	translation	:	‘duty,	righteousness	etc’;	but	Dharma	encompasses	more	–	it	is	the	code	of
life;	antonym:	adharma
Dharmayudha Ancient	ethical	code	of	battle
dhobi
Washerman	caste
Traditional	lower	garment	for	men,	made	from	an	unstitched	length	of	cloth;	the	dhoti	was
Dhoti
also	worn	in	a	different	style	by	lower-class	women	in	ancient	India
Durbar
Court	or	assembly
Gandhara
Present-day	Kandahar	in	Afghanistan
Singers	in	the	courts	of	the	Gods;	they	were	considered	to	be	supernatural	beings	pining	for
Gandharvas love	and	acted	as	messengers	between	the	Gods	and	men.	In	this	book,	they	are	just	another
aborigine	tribe,	living	on	the	fringes	of	the	clashing	Asura	and	Deva	empires.
ghat
A	broad	flight	of	steps	leading	down	to	the	bank	of	a	river	and	used	by	bathers	or	washermen
gobar
Cow	dung
Har	Har
Hail	Shiva,	the	Greatest	God
Mahadev
King	of	the	Gods;	in	this	book,	it	is	the	generic	name	of	the	tribe	who	are	the	nominal	rulers	of
Indra
the	Devas
Indrajith
‘One	who	had	vanquished	Indra’	–	another	name	of	Meghanada
Jambu
Ancient	name	of	the	Asian	continent
Dweepa
Jay,	Jai
Hail;	victory
Time;	also	God	of	Time	and	God	of	Death,	who	is	commonly	known	as	Yama	(derived	from
Kala
the	unit	for	measuring	time	–	yamam)
Kalaripayattu The	traditional	martial	art	form	of	south	India,	especially	Kerala
karma
Action	or	deed
Kingara
Servants;	soldier-slaves
In	Hindu	mythology	these	were	celestial	musicians	who	were	half-horse	and	half-human.	In
Kinnaras
this	book,	they	are	treated	as	just	another	tribe.
In	Hindu	mythology,	he	is	the	god	of	wealth,	patron	god	of	business	men.	In	this	story,	he	is
Kubera
just	a	man	running	a	huge	business	empire
Kurta
Indian	shirt
lakhs
One	hundred	thousand
Lankeswara Lord	of	Lanka,	another	name	of	Ravana
lathi
Cane	stick	usually	used	by	police	to	control	crowd
Traditional	lower	garment	of	south	Indian	men,	made	from	an	unstitched	length	of	cloth	which
lungi
is	wrapped	around	the	waist
Tribes	from	the	Western	Ghats	(Sahyas)	of	India.	These	tribes	were	priests	before	Brahmins
Malayans,
became	prominent.	Even	now,	many	rituals	in	the	Malabar	region	are	conducted	by	people	of
Vannans
this	caste.
Mata
Mother
mehendi
Application	of	henna	as	a	temporary	form	of	skin	decoration,	especially	for	marriage
mela
Gathering
mlecha
Barbarian/	uncivilized	people
moksha
Rough	translation:	‘salvation’;	nirvana	in	Buddhism
Mrudangam,
Milavu,
Percussion	instruments,	which	like	the	Chenda,	are	known	as	Asura	instruments
Timila	&
Maddallam
Dharma

mundu
Nagas

Traditional	south	Indian	lower	class,	formal	garment,	worn	by	both	men	and	women
An	ancient	tribe,	literally	meaning	‘serpents’
The	only	Indian	festival	celebrated	in	honour	of	an	Asura	King	–	Mahabali.	It	is	the	state
festival	of	Kerala,	where	people	still	believe	that	the	reign	of	this	Asura	King,	who	was
Onam
cheated	of	his	kingdom	by	Lord	Vishnu	in	his	Vamana	avatar,	was	the	ideal,	when	every	human
being	was	considered	equal.
pallu
the	loose	end	of	a	draped	sari	worn	by	women
Panchayat
Indian	village	council,	usually	with	5	members
Literally	‘Supreme	God’	and	another	name	for	Shiva,	one	of	the	Trinity	of	Hindu	Gods	(the
Parameswara
other	two	being	Brahma	and	Vishnu)
pariah
The	lowest	and	most	discriminated-against	caste
Parvati
Consort	of	Lord	Shiva
Pasupathi
Literally	‘Lord	of	the	Beasts’,	usually	applied	to	Shiva
patala
Nether	world;	in	this	book	it	means	the	capital	of	the	Asuras	in	exile
Poorna
River	in	Kerala,	also	known	as	Periyar
Prabhu
Sir,	an	honorific;	also	used	to	mean	a	rich	man
Puja
Religious	ritual	conducted	in	reverence	to	a	God
Ragas
Indian	musical	scales
Raja	Dharma Code	of	ethics	of	a	ruler
Sacrifice	performed	by	ancient	Kings	of	India	who	considered	themselves	powerful	enough	to
Rajasooya
be	Emperors
Rakshasa
A	mythological	evil	being;	Ravana	is	often	called	Rakshasa	Raja	or	‘King	of	Demons’
Sarswathi
A	mighty	river	which	once	flowed	between	the	Indus	and	Ganges	but	which	has	now	vanished
Rudra	Veena Ancient	string	instrument
Sahya
Mountains	parallel	to	the	western	seaboard	of	India
samhita
A	collection	of	holy	hymns/science/knowledge
sari
Traditional	attire	of	Indian	women,	made	from	6	yards	of	unstitched	material
Sarpanch
Village	chief	or	head	of	a	Panchayat
One	of	the	Hindu	Trinity	of	Gods	–	the	Destroyer,	who	after	every	eon,	destroys	the	Universe,
Shiva
after	which	Brahma	recreates	it.	In	this	book,	it	is	the	name	of	an	ancient	Asura	King	who
became	a	God	by	virtue	of	his	great	deeds.
Shravan
Fifth	month	of	the	Hindu	calendar;	considered	to	be	a	holy	month
The	lowest	of	four	Varnas,	the	other	three	being,	in	order	of	precedence:	Brahmana,
Shudras
Khshatriya,	and	Vaishya
Sindhu
Indus
‘That	which	is	remembered’;	Hindu	laws	written	by	different	sages,	including	Manu	Smriti,	the
smritis
code	for	society	in	ancient	India
Soma
An	important	ritual	drink	during	Vedic	times
Ancient	Indian	custom	wherein	a	girl	chooses	her	groom	from	a	gathering	of	suitors,
swayamvara
sometimes	through	competition
tapsya
Penance
Timila
A	percussion	instrument	used	in	India,	also	known	as	an	Asura	instrument
Trimurthi
Trinity	of	Gods
Collection	of	holy	books;	they,	along	with	their	commentary	called	Brahmanas,	form	the	basis
Upanishads
of	Indian	philosophical	thought
vana
Grove
Literally	‘monkeys’.	In	this	book,	they	are	a	race	of	mixed	Asura	and	Deva	origin,	dominating

Vanaras

south-central	India

Literally	‘colour’	but	meaning	‘social	groups’;	Hindu	society	was	divided	into	4 	basic	varnas,
with	the	Brahmana	or	Brahmins	(priests	and	teachers),	as	supreme.	The	Khshatriyas	were	the
warriors	who	formed	the	second	rung;	and	Vysyas	or	merchants	formed	the	third.	The	Shudras
varna
were	at	the	bottom	of	caste	hierarchy	–	they	were	farmers,	craftsmen,	foot	soldiers,	petty
traders,	dancers,	musicians,	etc.	Below	the	4 	basic	varnas	were	the	poorest	of	the	poor,	the
untouchables	etc
In	the	ancient	Hindu	way	of	life,	the	ideal	lifespan	of	an	individual	was	divided	into	4 	stages:
student,	householder,	retiree	and	renunciate.	This	formed	the	basis	for	the	ideal	varnavarnashrama
ashrama-dharma	system	of	life	in	which	society	was	divided	into	4 	social	groups	(varnas),
dharma
according	to	one’s	natural	talents	and	propensities	–	the	intelligentsia	and	priests	(brahmana),
administrators	and	warriors	(kshatriya),	traders	(vaishya),	and	the	proletariat	(sudra).
God	of	the	Seas	in	Hindu	mythology.	In	this	book,	he	is	a	pirate	who	lorded	over	the	Indian
Varuna
Ocean
The	four	holy	books	(Rig,	Yajur,	Sama	and	Atharva),	of	the	Hindus,	considered	to	possess	all
Vedas
the	wisdom	in	the	world
Vijaya
Victory
vimana
Flying	machine;	the	great	epic	Ramayana,	speaks	of	Ravana’s	flying	machine	called	Pushpaka
The	second	of	the	Hindu	Trinity	of	Gods,	who	protects	the	rhythm	of	the	Universe	and	is	the
Vishnu
Preserver.	In	this	book,	it	is	the	name	of	the	clan	which	worked	for	Deva	supremacy.
Ritual	of	sacrificing	herbal	preparations	in	a	fire,	accompanied	by	the	chanting	of	Vedic
Yajna
mantras
Supernatural	beings	who	also	sometimes	the	patron	gods	of	trees	and	forests	in	Hindu
mythology.	They	are	believed	to	guard	hidden	treasures.	The	female	of	this	species,	called
Yakshas
Yakshi,	has	the	notoriety	of	charming	unsuspecting	travellers	into	the	forest	and	drinking	their
blood	or	eating	them.	In	this	book,	they	are	just	a	tribe	that	got	marginalized	by	the	conquering
Devas.

